§ 17.06.030 Definitions.

"Flag lot (also known as a panhandle lot)" means a lot that has less than the minimum required frontage on a public or private street, have access to a public or private street by a narrow strip of land, and the largest portion of the lot is situated behind adjoining lots which front on a public or private street.

"Frontage" means that portion of a building or lot facing and having access to a public or private street, including an alley.

"Lot" means a piece or unit of land, the boundaries of which have been established according to the legal requirements in effect at the time the lot was created or which has been issued a certificate of compliance, occupied or capable of being occupied, by a permitted principal building(s) and its accessory structures (See Lot access requirement, Chapter 17.52).

"Lot, corner" means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

"Lot coverage" means the land area covered by all buildings or structures on a lot, including all projections except eaves. Decks or other structures with an elevation of 18 inches or less above finished grade shall not be considered as lot coverage.

"Lot frontage" means the width of the property at the front lot line.

"Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner or through lot.

"Lot line" means the property line bounding a lot. Lots on private streets that have access provided by way of an easement shall utilize the edge of the street easement as the lot line, unless otherwise determined by the Community Development Director (See Lot line, front).

"Lot line, front" means the line separating the lot from a public or private street, or the line separating the principal access to the lot from a publicly owned plaza, mall, or parking facility. In the case of a corner lot, the front line is the shorter of any two adjacent street lot lines.

"Lot line, rear" means the lot line opposite to, and most distant from, the front lot line other than a side lot line.

"Lot line, side" means any lot line, other than a front or rear lot line, which intersects a front lot line.

"Lot of record." See Lot.

"Lot, nonconforming." See Nonconforming lot.

"Lot, through or double frontage" means a lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets (excluding alleys), and which is not a corner lot. Where there is access and building orientation to both streets, both street lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines. Otherwise, one lot line is considered the rear yard, where "back on" treatment applies if any fencing is proposed (See Fences, Chapter 17.52.).

"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the front setback line.

"Parcel." Parcel or assessor's parcel is a term for a unit of land created and assigned a number by the Napa County Assessor. Since an assessor's parcel is established for assessment purposes only, it is often, but not always a lot of record.

"Setback" means the distance by which any use or structure is required to be removed from a lot line contiguous to a public or private right-of-way, except for alleys (see Alley); through lots (see Lot, through); lots adjacent to new private streets when there is no legal access (See Setback and yard determinations in unusual cases, Section 17.52.430(C)); and such encroachments as are specifically permitted by this title.

"Setback, front" means the required minimum horizontal distance between the use or structure and the front lot line, except for such encroachments as are permitted by this title. See Lot line, front.

"Setback, side" means the required minimum horizontal distance between the use or structure and the street-facing side lot line on a corner lot, except for such encroachments as are permitted by this title. See Lot line, side; Lot, corner.

"Yard" means a required open area between a building and a rear lot line or interior side lot line(s), unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up, except for such encroachments as are expressly permitted by this title.

"Yard, rear" means an open area extending the full width of an interior lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. In the case of a corner lot, an open area extending from the interior side lot line to the side setback.

"Yard, side" means an open area extending from the front setback to the rear yard, between the principal building and the adjacent interior side lot line, measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the adjacent interior side lot line.
