17.3.4 - Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs).

modified

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with state law regarding accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) [California Government Code Sections 66314 and 66333]. To the extent anything in these regulations is inconsistent with state law, including as it may be amended, state law will govern and these regulations will be interpreted and applied as required by state law.

B. Streamlined ADUs. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 66323 the City shall approve ADUs and JADUs in a streamlined manner as required by state law. For example, the City shall approve the following streamlined ADUs if the specified development standards and use restrictions are met:

1. State Exempt ADUs and JADUs.

a. The unit is located within a residential or mixed use zone.

b. The unit complies with applicable building codes, fire codes, and health and safety regulations; however, the unit is not required to provide fire sprinklers if fire sprinklers are not required for the primary dwelling.

c. The unit may be rented in full or in part for the purpose of overnight lodging for terms of thirty (30) or more consecutive days, but it shall not be rented for overnight lodging for shorter terms, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the City's short-term rental regulations (see section 17.3.12). Neither the primary dwelling nor the ADU or JADU shall be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the other unit, except pursuant to California Government Code Section 66341.

d. If the unit is connected to an onsite water system, a percolation test has been completed within the last five years, or if the percolation test has been recertified, within the last ten years.

2. Within Existing Space (Single-Family)—ADUs and JADUs.

a. The lot on which the ADU or JADU is located contains an existing or proposed single-family dwelling.

b. One ADU and one JADU are permitted per lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling if all of the following apply:

i. The ADU or JADU has exterior access independent from the existing residence.

ii. The existing single-family dwelling or accessory structure has side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire and safety, as determined by the Moraga-Orinda Fire Protection District (MOFD). If the existing residence or structure complies with the City's setback requirements as described in Chapter 17.4, it shall automatically meet this standard.

c. If an ADU or JADU is proposed, it is within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling, the existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure, or requires an addition of no more than 150 square feet to an existing accessory structure to accommodate ingress and egress.

d. If a JADU is proposed, it shall also comply with the requirements of California Government Code Section 66333.

3. Detached, New Construction (Single-Family)—ADUs.

a. The lot on which the ADU is located contains an existing or proposed single-family dwelling.

b. The lot on which the ADU is located does not contain another ADU, but may contain a JADU permitted pursuant to Subsection (B)(2).

c. The ADU is detached from the single-family dwelling.

d. The ADU is new construction.

e. The ADU is located at least four feet from the side and rear lot lines, is no greater than eight hundred (800) adjusted square feet in floor area, and has a height in compliance with OMC section 17.3.4.(C)(4)(c).

4. Within Existing Space (Multifamily)—ADUs.

a. The lot on which the ADU is located contains an existing multifamily dwelling.

b. The ADU is located within a portion of the multifamily dwelling structure that is not used as livable space.

c. The total number of ADUs within the dwelling structure does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the existing number of primary dwelling units within the structure, provided that all multifamily dwelling structures shall be permitted at least one ADU pursuant to this Subsection if the other standards are met.

5. Detached, New Construction (Multifamily)—ADUs.

a. The lot on which the ADU is located contains an existing or proposed multifamily dwelling.

b. The ADU is detached from the multifamily dwelling.

c. The ADU is located at least four feet from the side and rear lot lines and has a height in compliance with OMC section 17.3.4.(C)(4)(c).

d. Number of ADUs.

i. On a lot with an existing multifamily dwelling, not more than eight detached accessory dwelling units. However, the number of accessory dwelling units allowable pursuant to this clause shall not exceed the number of existing units on the lot.

ii. On a lot with a proposed multifamily dwelling, not more than two detached accessory dwelling units.

C. All Other ADUs. Any ADU that does not meet the standards for streamlined ADUs in Subsection B shall meet the following development standards and use restrictions:

1. The ADU is located within a residential or mixed use zone.

2. The lot on which the ADU is located contains an existing or proposed primary dwelling.

3. The lot on which the ADU is located does not contain another ADU or JADU.

4. The ADU meets all other applicable requirements of this code that do not involve discretionary review including, but not limited to, building height, setback, water channel setback, tree removal, ridgeline and environmental preservation overlay, payment of applicable fees, and building and fire code requirements; however:

a. Passageways. To the extent required by California Government Code Section 66314, no passageway is required in conjunction with the construction of an ADU.

b. Setbacks.

i. No setback is required for an ADU located within existing living area or an existing accessory structure, or an ADU that replaces an existing structure and is located in the same location and to the same dimensions as the structure being replaced.

ii. For all other ADUs, the required setback from side and rear lot lines shall be no more than four feet.

c. Building Heights.

i. Attached ADUs. The height limits applicable to the primary dwelling apply.

ii. Detached ADUs.

A. Detached ADUs located wholly or partially above a private garage shall be limited to sixteen (16) feet in height in the area between the setbacks applicable to the primary dwelling and the setbacks applicable to the ADU and otherwise limited by the height limits applicable to the primary dwelling.

B. Detached ADUs on a lot with an existing or proposed single family or multifamily dwelling unit shall be limited to sixteen (16) feet in height.

C. Detached ADUs on a lot with an existing or proposed single family or multifamily dwelling unit that is within one-half of one mile walking distance of a major transit stop or a high-quality transit corridor, as those terms are defined in Section 21155 of the Public Resources Code, shall be limited to eighteen (18) feet in height. An additional two feet in height shall be allowed to accommodate a roof pitch on the accessory dwelling unit that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary dwelling unit.

D. Detached ADUs on a lot with an existing or proposed multifamily, multistory dwelling shall be limited to eighteen (18) feet in height.

d. Fire Sprinklers. The ADU is not required to provide fire sprinklers if fire sprinklers are not required for the primary dwelling.

e. Parking. For ADUs with one or more bedrooms:

i. One all-weather surface, off-street parking space measuring at least nine feet by nineteen (19) feet shall be provided for the ADU.

ii. The required parking space may be located as a tandem space in an existing driveway or in the required setbacks. "Tandem parking" means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.

iii. The above parking requirements shall not apply:

A. To an ADU that is located within one-half (0.5) mile walking distance of public transit, defined as an existing BART or public bus stop;

B. To an ADU that is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district;

C. To an ADU that is part of a proposed or existing primary dwelling unit or accessory structure;

D. When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU; or

E. To an ADU that is located within one block of the designated pick-up or drop-off location of a car-share vehicle, where such vehicle is owned by a car-sharing company;

F. When a permit application for an ADU is submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling or a new multifamily dwelling on the same lot, provided that the ADU or the parcel satisfies any other criteria listed in Government Code section 66322, subdivisions (a)(1)—(5).

f. Skirt walls. Any skirt wall developed in conjunction with an ADU shall be less than six feet in height.

5. The ADU may be rented, but it shall not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary dwelling except pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66340 through 66342.

6. Maximum size. The floor area limits in Section 17.6.2 of the Orinda Municipal Code shall not apply. An ADU shall meet all of the following requirements:

a. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 66321, the floor area shall not exceed eight hundred and fifty (850) adjusted square feet (studio or one bedroom) or one thousand (1,000) adjusted square feet (more than one bedroom); and

b. Compliance with any other maximum size requirements contained in any applicable development agreement or other similar, lot-specific restriction on maximum size, provided that such requirements shall not be used to reduce the ADU below eight hundred (800) adjusted square feet.

c. For determining compliance with this Subsection, floor area shall be calculated pursuant to Section 17.6.3 and Section 17.6.4 of the Orinda Municipal Code.

D. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall ministerially process for approval any application for a building permit for an ADU or JADU that meets all the criteria in this Section.

E. Combination Proposals.

1. When an ADU is proposed in conjunction with another proposal for which City approval is required under this Code (e.g., new garage, new single-family residence, substantial addition to an existing residence), the City shall follow the process as required by California Government Code Section 66320.

2. No certificate of occupancy will be issued for an ADU prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary dwelling.

F. Non-Compliant Proposals. If the above requirements are not met, the proposed ADU cannot be approved under this Section. Notwithstanding any other contrary provisions of this Code, applicants may seek a variance for an ADU in accordance with Chapter 17.33 but not an exception in accordance with Chapter 17.32.

G. Converted Parking. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a private garage, carport, covered parking structure, or uncovered parking space is demolished or converted in conjunction with the construction of an ADU, the spaces are not required to be replaced, as required by California Government Code Section 66314(d)(11).

H. Fees. No impact fees, as defined in California Government Code Section 66324(c)(1), shall be imposed on ADUs smaller than seven hundred and fifty (750) adjusted square feet. Impact fees for all other ADUs shall be charged proportionately in relation to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.

I. Existing Accessory Dwelling Unit. An existing ADU may be enlarged or modified in accordance with the requirements of state law and this Section.

J. Density. To the extent required by California Government Code Section 66314, an ADU or JADU built in conformance with this Section does not count toward the allowed density for the lot upon which the ADU or JADU is located.

K. General Plan and Zoning Designations. ADUs and JADUs are residential uses that are consistent with the City's existing general plan and zoning designations.

L. No more than two dwelling units of any kind will be permitted by the City on a parcel created through the exercise of the authority contained in California Government Code Section 66411.7.

(Ord. 07-02 § 2: Ord. 03-03 § 4: Ord. 99-5 § 2 Exh. A (part); Ord. No. 17-03; § 2(Att. A), 8-1-17; Ord. No. 18-02, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-18; Ord. No. 20-02, § 2(Att. A), 5-19-20; Ord. No. 21-8, § 2(Att. A.1), 1-11-22; Ord. No. 25-02, § 2(Att. A), 5-20-25)
