Sec. 26-04-020. - Definitions.

7. Lot. Lot means a legally defined parcel or contiguous group of parcels in single ownership or under single control, usually considered a unit for purposes of development.

8. Lot, Corner. A lot, two (2) or more adjacent sides of which abut upon a street.

9. Lot Coverage. See "building coverage."

10. Lot, Frontage. The linear measurement of the front lot line.

11. Lot, Key. An interior lot adjacent to a corner lot, the side line of which is contiguous with the rear lot line of the corner lot.

12. Lot Lines. The property lines bounding the lot.

13. Lot Line, Front. Any of the following: (1) each street lot line of an interior or through lot, (2) either one or the other of the two (2) street lot lines of a corner lot.

14. Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front line, where such lot line is not also a street lot line.

15. Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line.

16. Lot of Record. A lot that is designated upon a map showing the lot, block and tract as indicated on a final map, as such map is filed in the County recorder's office, or as a lot shown on a recorded parcel map.

17. Lot Width. The least distance between the side lot lines, measured at points midway between the front and rear lot lines. In the case of triangular lots, or lots that are bounded by more than four (4) straight lines, or that have curvilinear side lines, the planning director shall determine the lot width.

18. Lot Depth. Lot depth is measured along an imaginary straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.

20. Street Line. The boundary between a street and property.

1. Yard, Front. A yard extending across the front of the lot between the inner side yard lines and measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest lines of the building; provided, that if any building line or official plan line has been established for the street upon which the lot faces, then such measurement shall be taken from such building line or official plan line to the nearest line of the building.

2. Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the main building.

3. Yard, Side. A yard between the line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front line of the lot to the rear yard.
