22.130.030 - Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases.

Flag lot. See "Lot or Parcel."

Front Wall. The wall of the building or other structure nearest the street upon which the building faces.

Front Wall (Signs). For the purposes of Chapter 22.28 (Signs), the front wall is the wall of a structure that contains the primary entrance or entrances to the premises. If there are entrances in more than one wall, the longest of the walls in which primary entrances are located shall be the front wall. The front wall includes not only the wall itself, but all doors, windows, and other openings and projections. See Figure 8-2.

Frontage. See "Lot Frontage."

Lot. A legal lot of record. Types of lots include the following. See Figure 8-3 (Lot Types):

1. Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, bounded on two or more sides by street lines.

2. Flag Lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee or by means of an access easement.

3. Interior Lot. A lot abutting only one street.

4. Through Lot. A lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets.

FIGURE 8-3
LOT TYPES

Lot Area. Lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent street or paper street rights-of-way and any portion of the property located below mean high tide that is subject to tidal action.

Lot Coverage. Lot coverage is the percentage of total site area occupied by buildings and other structures, impervious paving and other hard surfaces that have a water runoff factor of 0.5 or more according to the Bay Area Storm Water Management Agencies Association guidelines. Structure/building coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks, porches, stairs, etc.). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. See Figure 8-4 (Lot Coverage).

FIGURE 8-4
LOT COVERAGE

Lot Depth. The average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line. See Figure 8-5 (Lot Lines and Lot Features). The Director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.

FIGURE 8-5
LOT LINES AND LOT FEATURES

Lot Frontage. The boundary of a lot adjacent to a public or private street right-of-way.

Lot Line, or Property Line. Any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows (see Figure 8-5 (Lot Lines and Lot Features)):

1. Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the property line bounding the street to which the property is addressed and the street from which access is taken. On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.

2. Interior Lot Line. Any lot line not abutting a street.

3. Rear Lot Line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line.

4. Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

Lot Width. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines. See Figure 8-5 (Lot Lines and Lot Features). The Director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape.

Parcel. A unit of real property.

Parcel Map. The subdivision map described by the Subdivision Map Act, Article 3, Chapter 2, which is required by Article VI (Subdivisions) of this Development Code to complete a subdivision of four or fewer lots.

Property Line. See "Lot Line or Property Line."

Setback. The distance by which a structure is required to be separated from a boundary line, measured perpendicular to the boundary line. Setbacks from private streets and driveways are measured from the edge of the easement. See also "Yard." Figure 8-6 (Setbacks) shows the location of front, side, street side, and rear setbacks.

FIGURE 8-6
SETBACKS

Yard. An area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this Development Code. See Section 22.20.090 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions) and Figure 8-7 (Setbacks).

1. Front Yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and a structure.

2. Rear Yard. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and a structure.

3. Side Yard. An area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and a structure.

4. Interior Yard. An area between a lot line and a structure that does not abut a street or right-of-way.

Z. Definitions, "Z."
