CHAPTER 8.392 - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS

8.392.010 - Purpose.
Accessory dwelling units are a residential use that provide an important source of housing. The purpose of this
Chapter is to:

1.     Increase the supply and diversity of the County’s housing stock, in particular the number of smaller and
       more affordable units, by allowing accessory dwelling units to be built on existing residential properties,
       while preserving the neighborhood character.

2.     Increase the housing stock of existing neighborhoods in a manner that has less impact on the environment
       than development of housing in undeveloped areas.

3.     Allow more efficient use of existing residential areas and supporting infrastructure.

4.     Provide a means for residents to remain in their homes and neighborhoods.

5.     Provide opportunities for homeowners to earn supplemental income from renting an accessory dwelling
       unit.

6.     Establish standards for accessory dwelling units to ensure that they are safe, habitable, and compatible
       with existing development.

8.392.020 - Definitions.
1.     Accessory Dwelling Unit. An “accessory dwelling unit” is a dwelling unit located or proposed to be located
       on a lot which contains, or will contain, a primary residence. Accessory dwelling units may be detached
       from or attached to the primary residence on the property. Accessory dwelling units may also be (1)
       efficiency units, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code, or (2) manufactured
       homes, as defined in Section 18007 of the California Health and Safety Code. Accessory dwelling units are
       “accessory dwelling units” as that term is used in Government Code Section 65852.2. A “second unit” or
       “secondary unit” is an accessory dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units are not “accessory buildings” as
       defined in Section 8.04.030(22). Any secondary structure that provides independent facilities for living;
       sleeping; eating; cooking; and sanitation, may be considered an accessory dwelling unit, at the discretion of
       the Director of Planning and Building, unless an applicant can provide compelling evidence to the contrary
       to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Building.

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

2.     Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit. An “attached accessory dwelling unit” is a unit that is built as an
       addition to, extension of, or within the primary residence.

3.     Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit. A “detached accessory dwelling unit” is a unit that is an independent
       structure, entirely separated from the structure of the primary residence. Accessory dwelling units
       constructed within, or as an extension of an existing detached structure other than the primary residence
       are considered detached accessory dwelling units.

4.     Efficiency Kitchen. An efficiency kitchen, as defined in Government Code Section 65852.22, is a kitchen
       that contains at least a cooking facility with appliances, and a food preparation counter and storage
       cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.

5.     Floor Area. For purposes of this Chapter, the “floor area” of an accessory dwelling unit is the area of each
       floor level included within the walls enclosing each dwelling unit. The floor area shall be measured from
       the outside face of the walls enclosing each dwelling unit including all closet space and storage areas
       contained within the unit, including habitable basements and attics, but not including unenclosed porches,
       balconies, or any enclosed garages or carports. For purposes of calculating allowable floor area of
       accessory dwelling units based on a proportion of the size of the primary residence, only the livable floor
       area of the primary residence shall be counted. The floor area of any other structures, for purposes of
       calculating total floor area, lot coverage, or other calculations, shall be calculated in the manner described
       in the relevant zoning regulations.

6.     Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. A “junior accessory dwelling unit” is an accessory dwelling unit built
       entirely within the walls of an existing or proposed primary residence, not exceeding five hundred (500)
       square feet in size, and including an efficiency kitchen, as described in Government Code Section 65852.22.
       A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities
       with the existing or proposed primary residence.

7.     Multifamily Dwelling. Two (2) or more attached dwellings on a single lot is considered a multifamily
       dwelling. Multiple detached single-unit dwellings on the same lot are not considered a multifamily
       dwelling.

8.     Owner Occupancy. Owner occupancy is the condition and requirement that the owner of a parcel on
       which a junior accessory dwelling unit is constructed live in one (1) of the units on the property in
       perpetuity.

9.     Primary Residence. A “primary residence” is the main residence, including attached habitable and
       uninhabitable spaces, located or proposed to be located on the parcel on which an accessory dwelling
       unit(s) is located or proposed to be located.

10.    Stepback. A setback above the ground floor, where the building is “stepped back” an additional distance
       from the applicable property line.

11.    Uninhabitable space. Uninhabitable space is space that is not developed to full standards of habitability.

8.392.030 - Locations Permitted.
Accessory dwelling units shall be allowed in the R-1, R-2, R-3, PC, CMU-1, CMU-2, CMU-3, NMU, NMU-ECR, R-E, RH,
RM and TPZ districts, and all other districts in which residential uses are permitted, regardless of any regulations
that might otherwise prohibit accessory dwelling units in those districts.

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.392.040 - Approval.
Accessory dwelling units meeting all of the applicable requirements of Sections 8.392.050 through 8.392.090, shall
be approved ministerially, without public notice, public hearing, or discretionary review.

Accessory dwelling units not meeting the applicable standards set forth in Section 8.392.050 through 8.392.090 will
be considered a conditionally permitted use within the districts specified in Section 8.392.030 and may be
permitted by a conditional use permit pursuant to a public hearing before the Zoning Hearing Officer, as described
in Section 8.392.110.

8.392.050 - Development Standards For All Accessory Dwelling Units.
New accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements and standards described in this Chapter. Where
not superseded by the specific requirements described in this Chapter, accessory dwelling units shall also be
subject to the requirements applicable to any dwelling unit on the same parcel in the same district. Development
standards applicable to all accessory dwelling units include the following:

1.     Minimum Lot Area. Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from the minimum lot area per dwelling unit
       provisions in the applicable district.

2.     Minimum Lot Size. Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from all minimum lot size requirements.

3.     Maximum Density of Development. Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from any and all provisions
       limiting the maximum density of development in the applicable district.

4.     Setbacks. Notwithstanding the required setbacks in the applicable district, minimum setbacks for
       accessory dwelling units shall be:

       a.      Front Setbacks. With the exception of accessory dwelling units created entirely within the space of
               an existing structure, for all other accessory dwelling units regardless of height, the accessory
               dwelling unit may be located no closer to the front property line of the subject parcel than the
               lesser of:

               (1)    The front setback required by the relevant zoning district, or

               (2)    The distance from the front property line of the primary residence located or proposed to
                      be located on that parcel. For purposes of this section, the primary residence includes
                      attached garages. In cases where the application of the setbacks described in (1) and (2)
                      would preclude the creation of an accessory dwelling unit of at was eight hundred (800)
                      square feet with side and rear setbacks of at least four (4) feet, the accessory dwelling unit
                      may be located within the front setback, but must be located as far as possible from the
                      front property line.

                                    Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

             In cases where an existing primary residence is closer to the front property line than the front
             setback normally required in the applicable district, the accessory dwelling unit shall also be
             allowed to be located as close to the front property line as the primary residence.

             In cases where an accessory dwelling units are proposed to be built atop, or below an existing
             detached garage that is located within the required front setback, a conditional use permit shall be
             required unless this provision would preclude the creation of an accessory dwelling unit of at least
             eight hundred (800) square feet.

     b.     Side and Rear Setbacks. For accessory dwelling units created entirely within the space of an
            existing structure, or constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing
            structure, side and rear setbacks shall be those already existing for that structure.

            For all other accessory dwelling units regardless of height, the accessory dwelling unit may be
            located no closer to the property line than: Side: four (4) feet Rear: four (4) feet.

     c.     Stepbacks. Accessory dwelling units, whether attached or detached, exceeding sixteen (16) feet in
            height shall have the following stepbacks from the applicable property lines, located at a point no
            higher than sixteen (16) feet on the structure: Side: five (5) feet Rear: ten (10) feet.

5.   Floor Area. The allowable floor area of an accessory dwelling unit shall be calculated in the manner
     described in Sections 8.392.050 through 8.392.090, but in no case shall these regulations be applied in such
     a way as to preclude an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit of up to eight hundred (800) square
     feet in size that meets all other relevant standards.

6.   Lot Coverage. Accessory dwelling units shall count against the allowed lot coverage on a parcel, except
     that no lot coverage restriction shall preclude creation of an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit
     of up to eight hundred (800) square feet in size that meets all other relevant standards.

7.   Height. The maximum height of an accessory dwelling unit shall be twenty-six (26) feet. Building height
     shall be measured as the vertical distance from any point on the lower of (a) finished grade, or (b) natural
     grade, to the topmost point of the building immediately above. Chimneys, pipes, mechanical equipment,
     antennae, and other similar structures may extend up to eight (8) feet beyond the building height, as
     required for safety or efficient operation. Accessory dwelling units built entirely within an existing building
     shall be subject to the greater of the height limit applicable to that building in the relevant district, or the
     maximum height of the existing primary residence, measured in the manner described in the Zoning
     Regulations of the relevant district.

8.   Daylight Plane. Neither accessory dwelling units built above an existing detached or attached garage or
     accessory structure, nor detached accessory dwelling units taller than sixteen (16) feet in height, shall be
     subject to daylight plane requirements. Daylight plane applies to accessory dwelling units attached to or
     above existing single-family residences and taller than nineteen (19) feet in height, except daylight plane
     shall be measured from the setback applicable to the accessory dwelling unit.

9.   Balconies and Decks. Accessory dwelling units that do not meet the setback requirements that would
     apply to a primary residence in the same district shall have no rooftop decks, and no portion of any balcony
     or deck shall be located above ten (10) feet in height, exclusive of railings, measured in the same manner as

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

      height in Section 8.382.050(7), except on the side of the accessory dwelling unit facing the primary
      residence. Accessory dwelling units that meet the setback requirements that would apply to a primary
      residence in the same district may have rooftop decks and balconies to the extent otherwise allowed in the
      relevant district.

10.   Windows. Accessory dwelling units that do not meet the setback requirements that would apply to a
      primary residence in the same district shall have no windows located above or extending above ten (10)
      feet on the accessory dwelling unit, measured from finished grade, except on: (1) the side(s) of the
      accessory dwelling unit facing the primary residence, and (2) the side(s) of the accessory dwelling unit that
      comply with the setback requirements of the district. On the sides of the accessory dwelling unit that do
      not meet the setback requirements of the district, clerestory windows located above ten (10) feet on the
      accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed, if they have a lower sill height of no less than six (6) feet from the
      nearest interior floor of the accessory dwelling unit, and a total window height no greater than twenty-four
      (24) inches. Skylights shall be allowed.

11.   Fire Safety Requirements. For accessory dwelling units that do not meet the setback requirements of
      Section 8.392.050(4)(b) are required to provide fire-rated walls, windows, eaves, and other architectural
      features on the side(s) of the accessory dwelling unit that encroach on the setback. No egress windows
      shall be allowed on the side(s) of accessory dwelling unit that do not meet the setback requirements of
      Section 8.392.050(4)(b)

12.   Ingress and Egress. Accessory dwelling units shall have an independently accessible entrance that does not
      require passage through the primary residence.

13.   Required Facilities. With the exception of junior accessory dwelling units, which are subject to the
      requirements described in Section 8.392.080, all attached or detached accessory dwelling units must
      include the following:

      a.     Independent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

      b.     A kitchen area containing a refrigerator, sink, and permanently installed cooking appliance, which
             must include at least a fixed stovetop.

      c.     A fully plumbed bathroom including sink, shower, and toilet.

14.   Parking Requirements

      a.     Required Parking. One (1) new covered or uncovered parking space, in addition to those already
             existing on the parcel, shall be provided on-site for each new attached or detached accessory
             dwelling unit.

      b.     Parking Exemptions. Accessory dwelling units meeting any of the following criteria shall not be
             required to provide any parking in addition to that already provided on the parcel, or in the case of
             a concurrent application for a new primary and accessory dwelling unit, shall not be required to
             provide any parking in addition to the parking required for the primary residence:

             (1)     Accessory dwelling units located within one-half (1/2) mile walking distance of a public
                     transit stop or station. Public transit stops must be served by a transit line serving the
                     public, and not solely by specialized, private, or limited population services such as school
                     buses, privately run shuttles, or other services that cannot be used by all public riders.

                           Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

     (2)    Accessory dwelling units located within a designated architecturally and historically
            significant historic district.

     (3)    Accessory dwelling units that are part of the existing primary residence or an existing
            accessory structure, including attached or detached garages.

     (4)    Accessory dwelling units located within one (1) block of a car share vehicle pick-up/drop-off
            location.

     (5)    No parking exemption can be granted for properties (1) located within Wildland Urban
            Interface areas, which includes: Emerald Lake Hills, Devonshire, and other areas designated
            by the Fire Department as Wildland Urban Interface areas, and (2) where fire engine access
            and turnaround space required by California Fire Code: Fire Appendix D is not provided.

c.   Conversion of Covered Parking. Any covered parking removed in order to create an accessory
     dwelling unit is not required to be replaced, and if voluntarily replaced, may be replaced with
     uncovered parking of any type and configuration allowed by Section 8.392.050(14)(f), below. For
     purposes of this Section, conversion includes partial or full demolition of covered parking required
     to create an accessory dwelling unit.

d.   Garage Conversion. If an existing attached or detached garage is converted to an accessory
     dwelling unit, the parking previously provided by that garage is not required to be replaced, and if
     voluntarily replaced, may be replaced by uncovered parking of any type and configuration allowed
     by Section 8.392.050(14)(f), below, and no additional parking related to the accessory dwelling unit
     is required. For purposes of this Section, conversion includes partial or full demolition of the garage
     and partial or full replacement with an accessory dwelling unit.

e.   Use of Existing Parking. If the parking already existing on the parcel exceeds that required for
     existing development on the parcel, excess parking spaces shall be counted toward the new parking
     required for the accessory dwelling unit.

f.   Provision and Location of Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided in the following manner:

     (1)    Pervious Surfaces. All new uncovered parking spaces created for the accessory dwelling
            unit must be provided on pervious surfaces. The maximum amount of impervious surfaces
            designated to satisfy the accessory dwelling unit parking requirement shall be no greater
            than the amount of impervious surfaces existing at time of application. Existing impervious
            surface area may be used for parking and need not be converted to pervious surface.

     (2)    Uncovered Parking. All parking required for the accessory dwelling unit may be uncovered.

     (3)    Front or Side Yard Parking. Up to three (3) parking spaces may be provided in the front or
            side yard setbacks. Not more than six hundred (600) square feet of the front yard area shall
            be used for parking.

                                    Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

             (4)     Tandem Parking. Required parking spaces for the primary residence and the accessory
                     dwelling unit may be provided in tandem on a driveway. A tandem parking arrangement
                     consists of one (1) car behind the other. No more than three (3) total cars in tandem may
                     be counted toward meeting the parking requirement.

             (5)     Compact Spaces. All parking required for the accessory dwelling unit may be provided by
                     compact parking spaces, as defined in Section 8.344.020(a).

15.   Requests for Parking Exceptions. If the required parking for an accessory dwelling unit cannot be met in
      accordance with this Chapter, an application may be submitted for a parking exception, as specified in
      Section 8.344.040. For parking provided in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a parking
      exception shall not be required.

16.   Design Review. Accessory dwelling units shall not be subject to design review. Compatibility with
      applicable design standards for such units shall be determined by staff, at the discretion of the Director of
      Planning and Building.

17.   Architectural Review. Accessory dwelling units located in scenic corridors are not subject to architectural
      review.

18.   Concurrent Application for Development of Primary Residence and Accessory Dwelling Unit. In the case of
      a concurrent application for development of a new primary residence and new accessory dwelling unit on
      the same parcel, whichever unit is first issued a certificate of occupancy must conform to all applicable
      regulations for the primary residence in the relevant district.

19.   Conversion of Existing Residence. An existing residence may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit in
      conjunction with development of a new primary residence, if the existing residence, once converted, will
      meet all the standards applicable to development of a new accessory dwelling unit described in this
      Chapter.

20.   Conversion of Accessory Buildings. An accessory dwelling unit may be constructed within, above, or below
      an existing, detached accessory building, provided the resulting unit conforms to all applicable provisions
      of this Chapter.

       Accessory dwelling units constructed within, above, or below an existing, detached accessory building
       that conforms to all applicable provisions of this Chapter shall not be required to obtain a use permit,
       regardless of the requirements of the applicable district.

       Accessory dwelling units built within, above, or below existing, or new garages are subject to the specific
       provisions of this Chapter regarding such units, regardless of any regulations to the contrary elsewhere in
       the Zoning Regulations.

21.   Creation of Accessory Dwelling Unit Entirely Within a Non-Conforming Primary Residence.
      In the case of an existing primary residence that does not conform to one (1) or more provisions of the
      zoning regulations, creation of an accessory dwelling unit that will be entirely within the existing primary
      residence shall not, in itself, create a requirement that the nonconformities be rectified. No correction of
      existing nonconformities shall be required, unless they pose a threat to public health and safety.

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

22.    Short Term Rental. Accessory dwelling units created pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, if rented,
       shall only be rented for a term longer than thirty (30) days.

23.    Impact Fees. Accessory dwelling units of less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in size shall be
       exempt from all impact fees. Accessory dwelling units of greater than seven hundred fifty (750) square
       feet in size shall only be charged impact fees in an amount equal to the standard impact fee for such a unit,
       multiplied by the proportion of the square footage of the accessory dwelling unit to the square footage of
       the primary dwelling unit.

8.392.060 - Standards For Detached Accessory Dwelling Units.
Detached accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements described in Section 8.392.050, and to the
following requirements:

1.     Distance Between Detached Accessory Dwelling Units and Other Residential Structures. The distance
       required between a detached accessory dwelling unit and any other residential structure on the same
       parcel must be a minimum of five (5) feet, measured from foundation to foundation. If a separation
       distance greater than five (5) feet is required by any other section of the Zoning Regulations, it shall be
       disregarded, and the standards of this Chapter shall govern.

2.     Floor Area of Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. Notwithstanding any floor area standards applicable to
       accessory dwelling units in the applicable district, the following floor area standards shall apply:

       a.      The floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square
               feet or thirty-five percent (35%) of the livable floor area of the existing or proposed primary
               residence, whichever is larger, up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
               The floor area of the primary residence shall be calculated in the manner described in the relevant
               base or overlay district Zoning Regulations.

       b.      The floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall count against the total floor area allowed
               on a parcel, such that the total floor area of the accessory dwelling unit in combination with the
               square footage of the primary residence and other structures on or proposed to be on the parcel
               shall not exceed the maximum floor area allowed within the zoning district, with the following
               exception:

               (1)    Regardless of floor area limitations, a single eight hundred (800) square foot detached
                      accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a parcel, so long as that accessory dwelling unit
                      can meet the setback and stepback requirements described in Section 8.392.050.

3.     Detached Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. One (1) detached accessory
       dwelling unit may be built in combination with one (1) junior accessory dwelling unit on the same parcel, as
       long as both units comply with all relevant provisions of this Chapter. A detached accessory dwelling unit
       may not be built in combination with an attached accessory dwelling unit on the same parcel.

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.392.070 -Standards For Attached Accessory Dwelling Units.
Attached accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements described in section 8.392.050, and to the
following requirements:

1.     Floor Area of Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. Notwithstanding any floor area standards applicable to
       accessory dwelling units in the applicable district, the following floor area standards shall apply:

       a.      The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square
               feet or fifty percent (50%) of the livable floor area of the existing or proposed primary residence,
               whichever is larger, up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. The floor
               area of the primary residence shall be calculated in the manner described in the relevant base or
               overlay district Zoning Regulations.

       b.      The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall count against the total floor area allowed
               on a parcel, such that the total floor area of the accessory dwelling unit in combination with the
               square footage of the primary residence and other structures on or proposed to be on the parcel
               shall not exceed the maximum floor area allowed within the zoning district, with the following
               exception:

               (1)    Regardless of floor area limitations, a single eight hundred (800) square foot attached
                      accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a parcel, so long as that accessory dwelling unit
                      can meet the setback and stepback requirements in Section 8.392.050.

               (2)    For attached accessory dwelling units built entirely within the walls of an existing or
                      proposed primary residence, an additional one-hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area
                      is allowed regardless of other floor area limitation, solely for the purpose of providing
                      ingress/egress, and not for expanded living space. Such space for ingress and egress
                      typically includes, but is not limited to, stairs, porches, foyers, and other similar areas.

2.     Ingress and Egress for Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. With the exception of junior accessory dwelling
       units, attached accessory dwelling units shall only be allowed a connecting doorway or other permanent
       ingress or egress between the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit with the approval of the
       Director of Planning and Building, at the Director's discretion. In all cases, such doorways must be
       independently securable from within the accessory dwelling unit and from within the primary residence.

       For accessory dwelling units attached to the primary residence, any new entrances and exits may face the
       front of the parcel only if they are 1) located so as not to be visible from the front of the parcel, 2) unless
       otherwise, required by clearance and or landing requirements, or 3) permitted by the Director of Planning
       and Building, at the Director’s discretion.

3.     Attached Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. One (1) attached accessory
       dwelling unit may be built in combination with one (1) junior accessory dwelling unit built on the same
       parcel, as long as both units comply with all relevant provisions of this Chapter. A detached accessory
       dwelling unit cannot be built on the same parcel as an attached accessory dwelling unit.

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.392.080 - Standards For Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
Junior accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements described in 8.392.050, with the following
exceptions:

1.     Location. Junior accessory dwelling units must be constructed entirely within the walls of an existing or
       proposed primary single-family residence, including within the walls of a garage attached to the primary
       residence, except that an additional one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be built solely for the purpose
       of providing ingress and egress for the junior accessory dwelling unit.

2.     Floor area. The floor area of a junior accessory dwelling unit may be no greater than five hundred (500)
       square feet under any circumstance, except that an additional one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be
       created outside of the primary residence, solely for the purpose of providing ingress and egress for the
       junior accessory dwelling unit.

3.     Required Facilities. Junior accessory dwelling units must have a sleeping area, sink, and efficiency kitchen
       as defined in Government Code Section 65852.22. Junior accessory dwelling units may share a bathroom
       with the primary residence.

4.     Internal Ingress and Egress. Junior accessory dwelling units must have external ingress and egress, as
       described in Section 8.392.050.12. However, junior accessory dwelling units may have an internally
       connecting doorways between the junior accessory dwelling unit and the primary residence. The internally
       connecting doorway must be independently securable from both the junior accessory dwelling units and
       the primary residence. An internal connecting doorway between the junior accessory dwelling unit and the
       primary residence is required if the junior accessory dwelling unit does not include a separate bathroom.

5.     Owner Occupancy. The owner(s) of the parcel on which a junior accessory dwelling unit is proposed shall
       be required to occupy one (1) of the units on the parcel. The owner(s) shall be required to record a deed
       restriction enforcing this requirement, which shall run with the land, and which shall be provided to the
       Planning and Building Department. The deed restriction shall also include a prohibition on the sale of the
       junior accessory dwelling unit separate from the sale of the single-family residence, including a statement
       that the deed restriction may be enforced against future purchasers.

6.     Parking. No additional parking shall be required for the creatin of a junior accessory dwelling unit.

8.392.090 - Standards For Multiple Accessory Dwelling Units On Properties With Existing or
         Proposed Multifamily Structures.
On parcels with existing or proposed multi-family structures, including multi-family structures with two (2) or more
units, multiple accessory dwelling units shall be allowed, subject to the requirements described in Section
8.392.050, and to the following requirements:

1.     Accessory Dwelling Units within Multi-family Structures:

       a.      Multiple accessory dwelling units may be created within the portions of existing or proposed multi-
               family dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage

                                    Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

             rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, if each unit complies with State
             building standards for dwellings.

      b.     A minimum of one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed within an existing or proposed multi-
             family dwelling, and a maximum number of accessory dwelling units not exceeding twenty-five
             percent (25%) of the existing or proposed multi-family dwelling units on the parcel, if those
             accessory dwelling units meet all required standards of this Chapter.

2.    Detached Accessory Dwelling Units on Parcels with Multi-family Structures. Up to two (2) detached
      accessory dwelling units shall be allowed on a parcel that has an existing or proposed multi-family dwelling,
      subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

8.392.100 - Development Standards For Unpermitted Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.    Building permits may be issued for existing accessory dwelling units which were constructed without
      required permits, under the following conditions:

      a.     The accessory dwelling unit conforms to all applicable provisions of this Chapter, and all other
             applicable required standards for habitability.

      b.     All applicable fees for construction completed without permits have been paid.

      Accessory dwelling units constructed without permits that do not meet the provisions of this Section may
      apply for a conditional use permit, as described in Section 8.392.110.

8.392.110 - Requirements For Conditionally Permitted Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.    Accessory dwelling units not meeting all applicable standards of this Chapter, and which do not meet
      requirements of Section 8.392.120, Home Improvement Exceptions, may be conditionally permitted,
      subject to a conditional use permit.

2.    With the exception of accessory dwelling units described in 8.392.110(3), below, the process for
      application for and issuance of a conditional use permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be that set
      forth in Section 8.28.030 of the County Zoning Regulations, except that the granting of the permit shall be
      at the determination of the Zoning Hearing Officer. The determination of the Zoning Hearing Officer shall
      be appealable to the County Planning Commission only, subject to the procedures specified in Chapters
      8.280 and Chapter 8.448 of the Zoning Regulations.

3.    In the event that the creation or legalization of an accessory dwelling unit creates conflicts with standards
      specific to the base or overlay zoning of the parcel, or other standards for which specific exceptions are not
      provided in this Chapter, those conflicts must be addressed by whatever relief, if any, and through
      whatever procedures, are normally required by the regulations in which those standards are contained.

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

4.     In the case of accessory dwelling units meeting all applicable standards of this Chapter except those related
       to parking requirements, a parking exception may be requested as provided in Section 8.392.05(14)(f), and
       a conditional use permit shall not be required.

8.392.120 - Home Improvement Exceptions.
For accessory dwelling units that may be allowed contingent on approval of a Home Improvement Exception (HIE),
as described in Section 8.320.020, accessory dwelling units are exempt from the following requirements of Section
8.320.020:

1.     The improvement may not result in the creation of a new story. Accessory dwelling units permitted
       contingent on an HIE may result in creation of a new story.

2.     At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the existing exterior walls (in linear feet) will remain. Accessory
       dwelling units may be permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of the percent of linear feet of existing
       walls remaining.

3.     At least fifty percent (50%) of the existing roof (in square feet) will remain. Accessory dwelling units may
       be permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of the percent of existing roof remaining.

4.     The addition will be located at least three (3) feet from a property line. In the case of accessory dwelling
       units located within an existing structure, as described in subsection 8.392.050(4), accessory dwelling units
       may be permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of setbacks.

5.     The existing structure is located in an area with an average slope of less than twenty (20) percent.
       Accessory dwelling units may be permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of the average slope.

       The aforementioned units are also exempt from the required HIE findings of Section 8.320.060(1) and (2).

These exceptions to HIE standards are applicable only to the accessory dwelling unit, not to the primary residence
or any other development on the subject parcel.

Home Improvement Exceptions may not be used to allow an accessory dwelling unit of greater floor area than that
allowed by Section 8.392.050(5), or a junior accessory dwelling unit of greater floor area than allowed by Section
8.392.080(2)

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.392.130 - Decisions.
Applications for accessory dwelling units, except for those requiring a conditional use permit as specified in Section
8.392.110, shall be approved or denied ministerially, on the basis of the objective criteria included in this Chapter
and other applicable regulations. Consideration of other permits associated with development of the proposed
accessory dwelling unit only, that might otherwise be discretionary, including but not limited to Tree Removal,
Resource Management, and Grading Permits, and Off-Street Parking Exceptions shall also be ministerial, except as
provided in Section 8.392.110. No public notice or public hearing shall be required for review and approval or
denial of an accessory dwelling unit, unless an applicant requests exceptions to the standards set forth in this
Chapter.

8.392.140 - Appeals.
Decisions to approve or deny an application for an accessory dwelling unit that meets all relevant standards set
forth in this Chapter shall not be subject to appeal.

8.392.150 - Applicability In San Mateo County Coastal Zone And Coastal Development
         District.
These regulations shall only be applicable in areas outside San Mateo County’s Coastal Zone.

8.392.160 - Applicability Of County Regulations.
With the exception of specific standards and exemptions described in this Chapter, all accessory dwelling units
must comply with all applicable provisions in the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, including the Zoning
Regulations (Title 8 et seq.) and the Building Code (Title 10 et seq.).

(Chapter 22.5 - Added by Ordinance No. 2876 - January 24, 1984)

(Sections 6425 - 6434 repealed and replaced in their entirety by Ordinance No. 04768 - January 10, 2017)

(Sections 6425 - 6436 repealed and replaced in their entirety by Ordinance No. 4811 - March 26, 2019)

(Sections 6425 - 6437 repealed and replaced in their entirety by Ordinance No. 4834 - September 15, 2020)

(Sections 6425 – 6437 repealed and replaced in their entirety by Ordinance No. 4889 – May 21, 2024)

CHAPTER 8.396 - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS, COASTAL ZONE

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.396.010 – Purpose
Accessory dwelling units are a residential use that provide an important source of housing. The purpose of this
Chapter is to:

1.      Increase the supply and diversity of the County’s housing stock, in particular the number of smaller and
        more affordable units, by allowing accessory dwelling units to be built on existing residential properties,
        while preserving the neighborhood character.

2.      Increase the housing stock of existing neighborhoods in a manner that has less impact on the
        environment than development of housing in undeveloped areas.

3.      Allow more efficient use of existing residential areas and supporting   infrastructure.

4.      Provide a means for residents to remain in their homes and neighborhoods.

5.       Provide opportunities for homeowners to earn supplemental income from renting             an accessory
dwelling unit.

6.      Establish standards for accessory dwelling units in the County’s Coastal Zone to ensure that they are safe,
        habitable, compatible with existing development, and consistent with the policies of the County’s Local
        Coastal Program and the California Coastal Act.

8.396.020 - Definitions.

1.      Primary Residence. A “primary residence” is the main residence located or proposed to be located on the
        parcel on which an accessory dwelling unit(s) is located or proposed to be located.

2.      Accessory Dwelling Unit. An “accessory dwelling unit” is a dwelling unit located or proposed to be located
        on a lot which contains, or will contain, a primary residence. Accessory dwelling units may be detached
        from or attached to the primary residence on the property. Accessory dwelling units may also be (1)
        efficiency units, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code, or (2)
        manufactured homes, as defined in Section 18007 of the California Health and Safety Code. Accessory
        dwelling units are “accessory dwelling units” as that term is used in Government Code Section 65852.2.
        An accessory dwelling unit includes an efficiency unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and
        Safety Code or a manufactured home as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety code. A
        “second unit” or “secondary unit” is an accessory dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units are not
        “accessory buildings” as defined in Section 6102.19. Any secondary structure that provides independent
        facilities for living; sleeping; eating; cooking; and sanitation, may be considered an accessory dwelling

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

         unit, at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Building, unless an applicant can provide compelling
         evidence to the contrary to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Building.

3.       Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit. A “detached accessory dwelling unit” is a unit that is an independent
         structure, entirely separated from the structure of the primary residence. Accessory dwelling unit
         constructed within, or as an extension of an existing detached structure other than the primary residence
         are considered detached accessory dwelling units.

4.       Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit. An “attached accessory dwelling unit” is a unit that is built as an
         addition to, extension of, or within the primary residence.

5.       Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. A “junior accessory dwelling unit” is an accessory dwelling unit built
         entirely within the walls of an existing or proposed primary residence, not exceeding five hundred sq. ft.
         in size, and including an efficiency kitchen, as described in Government Code Section 65852.22. A junior
         accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the
         existing structure or unit.

6.       Efficiency Kitchen. An efficiency kitchen, as defined in Government Code Section 65852.22, is a kitchen
         that contains at least a cooking facility with appliances, and a food preparation counter and storage
         cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.

7.       Floor Area. For purposes of this Chapter, the “floor area” of an accessory dwelling unit is the area of each
         floor level included within the walls enclosing each dwelling unit. The floor area shall be measured from
         the outside face of the walls enclosing each dwelling unit including all closet space and storage areas
         contained within the unit, including habitable basements and attics, but not including unenclosed
         porches, balconies, or any enclosed garages or carports. For purposes of calculating allowable floor area
         of accessory dwelling units based on a proportion of the size of the primary residence, only the livable
         floor area of the primary residence shall be counted. The floor area of any other structures, for purposes
         of calculating total floor area, lot coverage, or other calculations, shall be calculated in the manner
         described in the relevant zoning regulations.

8.       Owner Occupancy. Owner occupancy is the condition and requirement that the owner of a parcel on
         which a junior accessory dwelling unit is constructed live in one of the units on the property in perpetuity.

9.       Stepback. A setback above the ground floor, where the building is “stepped back” an additional distance
         from the outermost point of the building at the ground level.

8.396.030 - Locations Permitted.
Accessory dwelling units shall be allowed in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts in the County’s Coastal Zone,
regardless of any regulations that might otherwise prohibit accessory dwelling units in any specific district.

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.396.040 – Approval.
Accessory dwelling units meeting all of the applicable requirements of Sections 8.396.050 through 8.396.090, as
applicable, shall be approved ministerially, without public notice, public hearing, or discretionary review, in the
manner and to the extent described in Section 6439.17.

Accessory dwelling units not meeting the applicable standards set forth in Sections 8.396.050 through 8.396.090 will
be considered a conditionally permitted use within the districts specified in Section 8.396.030 and may be
permitted by a conditional use permit pursuant to a public hearing before the Zoning Hearing Officer, as described
in Section 8.396.110 Conditionally permitted units may also still be subject to other permitting requirements and
approvals pertaining to the County’s Coastal Zone, as described in Section 8.396.180.

8.396.050 - Development Standards For All Accessory Dwelling Units
New accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements and standards described in this chapter. Where
not superseded by the specific requirements described in this chapter, accessory dwelling units shall also be
subject to the requirements applicable to any dwelling unit on the same parcel in the same district. Development
standards applicable to all accessory dwelling units include the following:

1.       Minimum Lot Area. Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from the minimum lot area per dwelling
         unit provisions in the applicable district.

2.       Minimum Lot Size. Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from all minimum lot size requirements.

3.       Maximum Density of Development. Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from any and all provisions
         limiting the maximum density of development in the applicable district.

4.       Setbacks. Notwithstanding the required setbacks in the applicable district, minimum setbacks for
         accessory dwelling units shall be:

                a. Front Setbacks. With the exception of accessory dwelling units created entirely within the space
                of an existing structure, for all other accessory dwelling units regardless of height, the accessory
                dwelling unit may be located no closer to the front property line of the subject parcel than the
                lesser of:

                  (1)      The front setback required by the relevant zoning district, or

                                  Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

                       (2)     The distance from the front property line of the primary residence located or
                  proposed to be located on that parcel. For purposes of this section, the primary residence
                  includes attached garages.

           In cases where an existing primary residence is closer to the front property line than the front
           setback normally required in the same district, the accessory dwelling unit shall also be allowed to
           be located as close to the front property line as the primary residence.

           In cases where an accessory dwelling unit is proposed to be built atop an existing detached garage
           that is located within the required front setback, a conditional use permit shall be required.

           b. Side and Rear Setbacks. For accessory dwelling units created entirely within the space of an
           existing structure, setbacks shall be those already existing for that structure, unless such setbacks
           present demonstrable safety issues.

           For all other accessory dwelling units regardless of height, the accessory dwelling unit may be
           located no closer to the property line than: Side: 4 feet; Rear: 4 feet.

           c. Stepbacks. Accessory dwelling units, whether attached or detached, exceeding 16 feet in height
           shall have the following stepbacks, located at a point no higher than 16 feet on the structure: Side:
           5 feet; Rear: 10 feet.

5.   Floor Area. The allowable floor area of an accessory dwelling unit shall be calculated in the manner
     described in Sections 8.396.050 through 8.396.090, but in no case shall these regulations be applied in
     such a way as to preclude an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit of at least 800 sq. ft. in size
     that meets all other relevant standards.

6.   Lot Coverage. Accessory dwelling units shall count against the allowed lot coverage on a parcel, except
     that no lot coverage restriction shall preclude creation of an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit
     of at least 800 sq. ft. in size that meets all other relevant standards.

7.   Height. The maximum height of the accessory dwelling unit shall be twenty-six feet. Building height shall
     be measured as the vertical distance from any point on the lower of (a) finished grade, or (b) natural
     grade, to the topmost point of the building immediately above. Chimneys, pipes, mechanical equipment,
     antennae, and other similar structures may extend up to eight feet beyond the building height, as
     required for safety or efficient operation. Accessory dwelling units built entirely within an existing
     building shall be subject to the greater of the height limit applicable to that building in the relevant
     district, or the maximum height of the existing primary residence, measured in the manner described in
     the Zoning Regulations of the relevant district.

                                   Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.    Daylight Plane. Neither accessory dwelling units built above an existing detached or attached garage or
      accessory structure, nor detached accessory dwelling units taller than sixteen (16) feet in height, shall be
      subject to daylight plane requirements.

9.    Balconies and Decks. Accessory dwelling units that do not meet the setback requirements that would
      apply to a primary residence in the same district shall have no rooftop decks, and no portion of any
      balcony or deck shall be located above ten (10) feet in height, exclusive of railings, measured in the same
      manner as height in Section 6439.7, except on the side of the accessory dwelling unit facing the primary
      residence. Accessory dwelling units that meet the setback requirements that would apply to a primary
      residence in the same district may have rooftop decks and balconies to the extent otherwise allowed in
      the relevant district.

10.   Windows. Accessory dwelling units that do not meet the setback requirements that would apply to a
      primary residence in the same district shall have no windows located above or extending above ten (10)
      feet on the accessory dwelling unit, measured from finished grade, except on: (1) the side(s) of the
      accessory dwelling unit facing the primary residence, and (2) the side(s) of the accessory dwelling unit
      that comply with the normal setback requirements of the district. On the sides of the accessory dwelling
      unit that do not meet the normal setback requirements of the district, clerestory windows located above
      ten (10) feet on the accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed, if they have a lower sill height of no less than
      six feet from the nearest interior floor of the accessory dwelling unit, and a total window height no
      greater than twenty-four (24) inches. Skylights shall be allowed.

11.   Ingress and Egress. Accessory dwelling units shall have an independently accessible entrance that does
      not require passage through the primary residence.

12.   Required Facilities. With the exception of junior accessory dwelling units, which are subject to the
      requirements described in Section 6439.8, all attached or detached accessory dwelling units must include
      the following:

      a.       Independent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

             b. A kitchen area containing a refrigerator, sink, and permanently installed cooking appliance, which
             must include at least a fixed stovetop.

      c.       A fully plumbed bathroom including sink, shower, and toilet.

13.   Parking Requirements

             a. Required Parking. Parking for accessory dwellings units shall be provided as follows:

                           Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

     (1)   Outside of the designated areas shown in LCP Maps 3.1, “ADU Parking Area – Montara and
           Moss Beach,” and 3.2, “ADU Parking Area – El Grenada and Pillar Point Harbor,” one new
           covered or uncovered parking space, in addition to those already existing on the parcel, shall
           be provided on-site for each new attached or detached accessory dwelling unit, unless the
           accessory dwelling unit meets the parking exemption criteria of subsection b. below. When
           a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the
           construction of an accessory dwelling unit or converted to an accessory dwelling unit outside
           of such designated areas, those off-street parking spaces are not required to be replaced.

     (2)   Within the designated areas shown in LCP Maps 3.1 and 3.2, at least one off-street parking
           space shall be required for each accessory dwelling unit, and all off-street parking
           requirements associated with other residential uses at the site shall be met onsite, including
           replacement parking spaces if any are removed or converted to accommodate an accessory
           dwelling unit.

b.   Parking Exemptions. Accessory dwelling units located outside of the designated areas shown in
     LCP Maps 3.1 and 3.2 and meeting any of the following criteria shall not be required to provide any
     parking in addition to that already provided on the parcel, or in the case of a concurrent application
     for a new primary and accessory dwelling unit, shall not be required to provide any parking in
     addition to the parking required for the primary residence:

     (1)   Accessory dwelling units located within one-half (1/2) mile of a public transit stop or station,
           measured as a direct line from the transit stop. Public transit stops must be served by a
           transit line serving the public, and not solely by specialized, private, or limited population
           services such as school buses, privately run shuttles, or other services that cannot be used by
           all public riders.

     (2)   Accessory dwelling units located within a designated architecturally and historically
           significant historic district.

     (3)   Accessory dwelling units that are part of the existing primary residence or an existing
           accessory structure, including attached or detached garages.

     (4)   Accessory dwelling units located within one (1) block of a car share vehicle pick-up/drop-off
           location.

c.   Conversion of Covered Parking. Any covered parking removed in order to create an accessory
     dwelling unit, if required to be replaced, may be replaced with uncovered parking of any type and
     configuration allowed by Section 8.396.050(13)(f), below. For purposes of this Section, conversion
     includes partial or full demolition of covered parking required to create an accessory dwelling unit.

d.   Garage conversion. If an existing attached or detached garage is converted to an accessory
     dwelling unit, the parking previously provided by that garage may be replaced by uncovered

                                  Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

            parking of any type and configuration allowed by Section 8.396.050(13)(f), below, and no additional
            parking related to the accessory dwelling unit is required. For purposes of this Section, conversion
            includes partial or full demolition of the garage and partial or full replacement with an accessory
            dwelling unit.

            e. Use of Existing Parking. If the parking already existing on the parcel exceeds that required for
            existing development on the parcel, excess parking spaces shall be counted toward the new
            parking required for the accessory dwelling unit.

      f.    Provision and Location of Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided in the following manner:

                   (1) Pervious Surfaces. All new parking spaces created for the accessory dwelling unit must
                   be provided on pervious surfaces. The maximum amount of impervious surfaces designated
                   to satisfy the accessory dwelling unit parking requirement shall be no greater than the
                   amount of impervious surfaces existing at time of application. Existing impervious surface
                   area may be used for parking and need not be converted to pervious surface.

                   (2) Uncovered Parking. All parking required for the accessory dwelling unit may be
                   uncovered.

                   (3) Front or Side Yard Parking. Up to three parking spaces may be provided in the front or
                   side yard. Not more than 600 sq. ft. of the front yard area shall be used for parking.

                   (4) Tandem Parking. Required parking spaces for the primary residence and the accessory
                   dwelling unit may be provided in tandem on a driveway. A tandem parking arrangement
                   consists of one car behind the other. No more than three total cars in tandem may be
                   counted toward meeting the parking requirement.

                   (5) Compact Spaces. All parking required for the accessory dwelling unit may be provided
                   by compact parking spaces, as defined in Section 8.344.010(a).

14.   Requests for Parking Exceptions. If the required parking for an accessory dwelling unit outside the
      designated areas shown in LCP Maps 3.1 and 3.2 cannot be met in accordance with this Chapter, an
      application may be submitted for a parking exception, as specified in Section 8.344.040. For parking
      provided in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a parking exception shall not be required.

15.   Design Review. Accessory dwelling units shall not be subject to design review, except to the extent that
      they are located in the County’s Coastal Zone. Accessory dwelling units in the County’s Coastal Zone are
      subject to relevant design review requirements incorporated in the County’s Local Coastal Program and
      Zoning Regulations, however, such units shall not be reviewed by a Design Review Committee, nor shall
      their design be subject to consideration at any public hearing. Compatibility with applicable design

                                    Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

      standards for such units shall be determined by the Director of Planning and Building or the Director’s
      designee.

16.   Architectural Review. Accessory dwelling units located in scenic corridors in the County’s Coastal Zone
      shall be subject to architectural review as normally required.

17.   Concurrent Application for Development of Primary Residence and Accessory Dwelling Unit. In the case
      of a concurrent application for development of a new primary residence and new accessory dwelling unit
      on the same parcel, whichever unit is first issued a certificate of occupancy must conform to all applicable
      regulations for the primary residence in the relevant district.

18.   Conversion of Existing Residence. An existing residence may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit in
      conjunction with development of a new primary residence, if the existing residence, once converted, will
      meet all the standards applicable to development of a new accessory dwelling unit described in this
      Chapter.

19.   Conversion of Accessory Buildings. An accessory dwelling unit may be constructed within or above an
      existing, detached accessory building, provided the resulting unit conforms to all applicable provisions of
      this Chapter.

      Accessory dwelling units constructed within or above an existing, detached accessory building that
      conforms to all applicable provisions of this Chapter shall not be required to obtain a use permit,
      regardless of the requirements of the applicable district.

      Accessory dwelling units built within or above existing garages are subject to the specific provisions of this
      Chapter regarding such units, regardless of any regulations to the contrary in the Zoning Regulations.

20.   Creation of Accessory Dwelling Unit Entirely Within a Non-Conforming Primary Residence. In the case of
      an existing primary residence that does not conform to one or more zoning regulations, creation of an
      accessory dwelling unit that will be entirely within the existing primary residence shall not, in itself, create
      a requirement that the nonconformities be rectified. However, no other provisions that may require
      rectification of existing nonconformities are waived merely due to approval of an accessory dwelling unit,
      unless specifically described in this Chapter.

21.   Short Term Rental. Accessory dwelling units created pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, if rented,
      shall only be rented for a term longer than 30 days.

22.   Impact Fees. Accessory dwelling units of less than 750 sq. ft. in size shall be exempt from all impact fees.
      Accessory dwelling units of greater than 750 sq. ft. in size shall only be charged impact fees in an amount
      equal to the standard impact fee for such a unit, multiplied by the proportion of the accessory dwelling
      unit to the primary dwelling unit.

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.396.060 - Standards For Detached Accessory Dwelling Units.
New detached accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements described in Section 6439.5, and to
the following requirements:

1.      Distance between Detached Accessory Dwelling Units and Other Residential Structures. The distance
        required between a detached accessory dwelling unit and any other residential structure on the same
        parcel must be a minimum of five (5) feet, measured from foundation to foundation. If a separation
        distance greater than five (5) feet is required by any other section of the Zoning Regulations, it shall be
        disregarded, and the standards of this Chapter shall govern.

2.      Floor Area of Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. Notwithstanding any floor area standards applicable to
        accessory dwelling units in the applicable district, the following floor area standards shall apply:

               a. The floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) sq. ft.
               or thirty-five percent (35%) of the livable floor area of the existing or proposed primary residence,
               whichever is larger, up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. The floor
               area of the primary residence shall be calculated in the manner described in the relevant base or
               overlay district Zoning Regulations.

               b. The floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall count against the total floor area
               allowed on a parcel, such that the total floor area of the accessory dwelling unit in combination
               with the square footage of the primary residence and other structures on or proposed to be on the
               parcel shall not exceed the maximum floor area allowed within the zoning district, with the
               following exception:

                     (1) Regardless of floor area limitations, a single eight hundred (800) square foot detached
                     accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a parcel, so long as that accessory dwelling unit
                     can meet the setback and stepback requirements described in Section 6439.5.4.

3.      Detached Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. One detached accessory
        dwelling unit may be built in combination with one junior accessory dwelling unit built on the same
        parcel, as long as both units comply with all relevant provisions of this Chapter.

8.396.070 - Standards For Attached Accessory Dwelling Units.
New attached accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements described in Section 6439.5, and to the
following requirements:

                                  Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

1.   Floor Area of Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. Notwithstanding any floor area standards applicable to
     accessory dwelling units in the applicable district, the following floor area standards shall apply:

           a. The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) sq. ft.
           or fifty percent (50%) of the livable floor area of the existing or proposed primary residence,
           whichever is larger, up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. The floor
           area of the primary residence shall be calculated in the manner described in the relevant base or
           overlay district Zoning Regulations.

           b. The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall count against the total floor area
           allowed on a parcel, such that the total floor area of the accessory dwelling unit in combination
           with the square footage of the primary residence and other structures on or proposed to be on the
           parcel shall not exceed the maximum floor area allowed within the zoning district, with the
           following exception:

                  (1) Regardless of floor area limitations, a single eight hundred (800) square foot attached
                  accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a parcel, so long as that accessory dwelling unit
                  can meet the setback and stepback requirements in Section 8.396.050(4).

                  (2) For attached accessory dwelling units built entirely within the walls of an existing or
                  proposed primary residence, an additional one-hundred fifty (150) sq. ft. of floor area is
                  allowed regardless of other floor area limitation, solely for the purpose of providing
                  ingress/egress, and not for expanded living space. Such space for ingress and egress typically
                  includes, but is not limited to, stairs, porches, foyers, and other similar areas.

2.   Ingress and Egress for Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. With the exception of junior accessory dwelling
     units, attached accessory dwelling units shall only be allowed a connecting doorway or other permanent
     ingress or egress between the primary residence and the accessory dwelling unit with the approval of the
     Director of Planning and Building, at the Director's discretion. In all cases, such doorways must be
     independently securable from within the accessory dwelling unit and from within the primary residence.
     Junior accessory dwelling units are permitted to have a connecting doorway or other permanent ingress
     or egress between the primary residence and the junior accessory dwelling unit, but such doorway must
     also be independently securable from within both the junior accessory dwelling unit and the primary
     residence.

     For accessory dwelling units attached to the primary residence, any new entrances and exits may face the
     front of the parcel only if they are 1) located so as not to be visible from the front of the parcel, or 2)
     unless otherwise, required by clearance and or landing requirements, or 3) unless permitted by the
     Director of Planning and Building, at the Director’s discretion.

3.   No Combining of Attached Accessory Dwelling Units and Other Accessory Dwelling Units.

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

         An attached accessory dwelling unit that does not meet the definition of, and comply with all relevant
         standards relating to, a junior accessory dwelling unit, may not be built in combination with any other
         attached or detached accessory dwelling unit on the same parcel.

8.396.080 - Standards For Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
New attached junior accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the requirements described in Section 8.396.050,
with the following exceptions:

1.       Location. Junior accessory dwelling units must be constructed entirely within the walls of an existing or
         proposed primary single-family residence, except that an additional one hundred fifty (150) sq. ft. may be
         built solely for the purpose of providing ingress and egress for the junior accessory dwelling unit.

2.       Floor area. The floor area of a junior accessory dwelling unit may be no greater than five hundred (500)
         sq. ft. under any circumstance, except that an additional one-hundred fifty (150) sq. ft. may be created
         outside of the primary residence, solely for the purpose of providing ingress and egress for the junior
         accessory dwelling unit.

3.       Required Facilities. Junior accessory dwelling units must have a sleeping area, sink, and efficiency kitchen
         as defined in Government Code Section 65852.22. JADUs may share a bathroom with the primary
         residence.

4.       Internal Ingress and Egress. Junior accessory dwelling units must have external ingress and egress, as
         described in Subsection 8.396.050(11). However, junior accessory dwelling units may have internally
         connecting doorways between the junior accessory dwelling unit and the primary residence. The
         internally connecting doorway must be independently securable from both the junior accessory dwelling
         units and the primary residence.

5.       Owner Occupancy. The owner(s) of the parcel on which a junior accessory dwelling unit is proposed shall
         be required to occupy one of the units on the parcel. The owner(s) shall be required to record a deed
         restriction enforcing this requirement, which shall run with the land, and which shall be provided to the
         Planning and Building Department. The deed restriction shall also include a prohibition on the sale of the
         junior accessory dwelling unit separate from the sale of the single-family residence, including a statement
         that the deed restriction may be enforced against future purchasers.

8.396.090 - Standards For Multiple Accessory Dwelling Units On Properties With Existing
         Multifamily Structures.
On parcels with existing multi-family structures, including multi-family structures with two or more units, multiple
accessory dwelling units shall be allowed, subject to the requirements described in Section 8.396.050 and to the
following requirements:

                                    Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

1.     Accessory Dwelling Units within Multifamily Structures:

             a. Multiple accessory dwelling units may be created within the portions of existing multi-family
             dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms,
             boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, if each unit complies with state building
             standards for dwellings.

             b. A minimum of one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed within an existing multi-family
             dwelling, and a maximum number of accessory dwelling units not exceeding twenty-five percent
             (25%) of the existing multi-family dwelling units on the parcel, if those accessory dwelling units
             meet all required standards of this Chapter.

2.     Detached Accessory Dwelling Units on Parcels with Multifamily Structures. No more than two detached
       accessory dwelling units shall be allowed on a parcel that has an existing multi-family dwelling, subject to
       the provisions of this Chapter.

8.396.100 - Development Standards For Existing Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.     Building permits may be issued for existing accessory dwelling units which were constructed without
       required permits, under the following conditions:

             a. The accessory dwelling unit conforms to all applicable provisions of this Chapter, and all other
             applicable required standards for habitability.

             b. All applicable fees for construction completed without permits have been paid.

       Accessory dwelling units constructed without permits that do not meet the provisions of this Section may
       apply for a conditional use permit, as described in Section 8.396.110.

8.396.110 - Requirements For Conditionally Permitted Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.     Accessory dwelling units not meeting all applicable standards of this Chapter may be conditionally
       permitted, subject to a conditional use permit.

2.     With the exception of accessory dwelling units described in Section 8.396.110(4), below, the process for
       application for and issuance of a conditional use permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be that set
       forth in Section 8.280.030 of the County Zoning Regulations, except that the granting of the permit shall

                                     Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

        be at the determination of the Zoning Hearing Officer. The determination of the Zoning Hearing Officer
        shall be appealable to the County Planning Commission only, subject to the procedures specified in
        Chapter 8.280 and Chapter 8.448 of the Zoning Regulations.

3.      In the case of accessory dwelling units within the Coastal Zone which are proposed in conjunction with
        other development that is required to be reviewed by the Planning Commission, the conditional use
        permit will be reviewed and granted by the Planning Commission only, and shall not be appealable. The
        Planning Commission’s review may not consider issues related to design review.

4.      Accessory dwelling units requiring a conditional use permit which are within the Coastal Development
        (CD) District may require a Coastal Development Permit that may be appealable to the Coastal
        Commission.

5.      In the event that the creation or legalization of an accessory dwelling unit creates conflicts with standards
        specific to the base or overlay zoning of the parcel, or other standards for which specific exceptions are
        not provided in this Chapter, those conflicts must be addressed by whatever relief, if any, and through
        whatever procedures, are normally required by the regulations in which those standards are contained.

6.      In the case of accessory dwelling units meeting all applicable standards of this Chapter except those
        related to parking requirements, a parking exception may be requested as provided in Section
        8.396.050(14), and a conditional use permit shall not be required.

8.396.120 - Home Improvement Exceptions.
For accessory dwelling units that may be allowed contingent on approval of a Home Improvement Exception (HIE),
as described in Section 8.320, accessory dwelling units are exempt from the requirements of Section 8.320 that:

1.      The improvement may not result in the creation of a new story. Accessory dwelling units permitted
        contingent on an HIE may result in creation of a new story.

2.      At least 75 percent of the existing exterior walls (in linear feet) will remain. Accessory dwelling units may
        be permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of the percent of linear feet of existing walls remaining.

3.      At least 50 percent of the existing roof (in sq. ft.) will remain. Accessory dwelling units may be permitted
        contingent on an HIE regardless of the percent of existing roof remaining.

4.      The addition will be located at least three feet from a property line. In the case of accessory dwelling units
        located within an existing structure, as described in 8.396.050(4), accessory dwelling units may be
        permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of setbacks.

                                      Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

5.       The existing structure is located in an area with an average slope of less than 20 percent. Accessory
         dwelling units may be permitted contingent on an HIE regardless of the average slope.

These exceptions to HIE standards are applicable only to the accessory dwelling unit, not to the primary residence
or any other development on the subject parcel.

Home Improvement Exceptions may not be used to allow an accessory dwelling unit of greater floor area than that
allowed by Section 8.396.050(5).

8.396.130 - Applicability In San Mateo County Coastal Zone And Coastal Development
         District.
These regulations shall only be applicable in areas inside San Mateo County’s Coastal Zone.

8.396.140 – Applicability Of County Regulations.
With the exception of specific standards and exemptions described in this Chapter, all accessory dwelling units
must comply with all applicable provisions in the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, including the Zoning
Regulations (Title 8 et seq.) and the Building Regulations (Title 10 et seq.).

8.396.150 – Coastal Development District.
In the Coastal Development (CD) District, all accessory dwelling units shall comply with all of the applicable
regulations of the district, including but not limited to the Sensitive Habitats, Visual Resources, and Hazards
policies of the Local Coastal Program. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to supersede or in any way alter
or lessen the effect or application of the California Coastal Act, the San Mateo County Local Coastal Program, or
the CD District regulations, except that no public hearing shall be required for accessory dwelling units that meet
all relevant standards of this Chapter, and approval of such accessory dwelling unit applications shall be made
ministerially, at the staff level. Accessory dwelling units shall count toward the total residential development limits
described in Section 1.23 and 3.22 of the County’s Local Coastal Program.

8.396.160 – Decisions.
Applications for accessory dwelling units, except for those requiring a conditional use permit as specified in Section
8.396.110, shall be approved or denied ministerially, on the basis of the objective criteria included in this Chapter
and other applicable regulations as defined in Section 8.392.130 Consideration of other permits associated with
development of the proposed accessory dwelling unit only, that might otherwise be discretionary, including but
not limited to Tree Removal, Coastal Development, Resource Management, and Grading Permits, shall also be
ministerial, except as provided in Section 8.396.110. Except for units that are within the Coastal Zone’s Appeals
Jurisdiction and/or that require a Coastal Development Permit, no public notice or public hearing shall be required
for review and approval or denial of an accessory dwelling unit, unless an applicant requests exceptions to the
standards set forth in this Chapter. In the case of units that are within the Coastal Zone’s Appeals Jurisdiction,
and/or require a Coastal Development permit, all required public notice will be provided.

                                       Title 8 – Zoning & Development Code

8.396.170 - Appeals.
Decisions to approve or deny an application for an accessory dwelling unit that meets all relevant standards set
forth in this Chapter shall not be subject to appeal, except if located in the Coastal Commission appeals area of the
CD District, in which case the decision may be appealable as provided in the CD District Regulations, Section
8.252.040(s).

8.396.180 – Applicability Of County Regulations.
With the exception of specific standards and exemptions described in this Chapter, all accessory dwelling units
must comply with all applicable provisions in the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, including the Zoning
Regulations (Title 8 et seq.) and the Building Code (Title 10 et seq.).

(Chapter 22.5.1 - Added by Ordinance No. 4834 – September 15, 2020)

(Sections 6439.1 – 6439.18 repealed and replaced in their entirety by Ordinance No. 4851 - September 14, 2021)
