8.04.030 - Definitions.

44. FRONT WALL.

The wall of the building or other structure nearest the street upon which the building faces but excluding certain
architectural features as specified in Chapter 8.340 of Title 8.

74. LOT.

A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a use, building, or unit group of buildings and accessory buildings
and uses together with such yards, open spaces, lot width, and lot area as are required by this Part and fronting upon a
street or a private easement determined by the Commission to be adequate for purposes of access.

75. LOT OF RECORD.

Land held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the County Recorder (at the time of the passage of
the ordinance establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located).

76. LOT, CORNER.

A lot not greater than one hundred (100) feet in width and located at the junction of two (2) or more intersecting
streets.

77. LOT, CORNER, REVERSED.

A corner lot which rears upon the side of another lot whether across an alley or not.

78. LOT DEPTH.

The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side
lot lines.

79. LOT LINES.

The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.

80. LOT LINE, FRONT.

In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street and, in the case of a corner lot, a line separating
      the narrowest lot frontage of the lot from the street.

81. LOT LINE, REAR.

Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is generally opposite and most distant from the front line of said lot. In the case
of a triangular or gore shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance
from the front line of the lot. In cases in which these definitions are not applicable, the Zoning Administrator shall
designate the rear lot line.

82. LOT LINE, SIDE.

Any lot boundary not a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior
side lot line; a side lot line separating a lot from a street is a street side lot line.

83. LOT WIDTH.

The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway
between the front and rear lot lines.

93. PARCEL OF LAND.

A contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant
or person.

123. YARD.

Any space on a lot other than a court which is open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except for
incidental projections permitted by this Part.

124. YARD, FRONT.

A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is measured horizontally from the front lot
line to the nearest wall of any main building or structure upon the lot.

125. YARD, REAR.

A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line. The
depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of a main building toward the
nearest point of the rear lot line.

126. YARD, SIDE.

A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard.
