SEC. 36.60.15. - Definitions - "F."

Flag lot. An interior lot which is located behind another lot and which has access to a public street by means of a narrow driveway or flag "pole," which is a part of the flag lot.

Frontage, building or occupancy. The length of that portion of a building or ground-floor occupancy which abuts a street, publicly used parking area or mall appurtenant to said building or occupancy expressed in lineal feet and fractions thereof.

Frontage, lot. The length of that portion of a lot which abuts a street expressed in lineal feet and fraction thereof.

SEC. 36.60.27. - Definitions - "L."

Lot. A parcel of land used or capable of being used under the regulations of this Chapter, lawfully created as such in accordance with the subdivision laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

Lot area. The computed area contained within the lot lines, said area to be exclusive of street rights-of-way, but including portions held in fee title in the same ownership which may have easements for such purposes as utilities or flood-control channels. The area of new public streets dedicated as part of a project shall be included in the calculation of lot area as part of a planned unit development or planned community or as determined by the subdivision committee or city council.

Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees within the lot lines.

Lot, coverage. That percentage of the total lot area covered by structures as herein defined.

Lot, depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines.

Lot, key. A lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front of which is substantially a continuation of the side property line of the corner lot.

Lot line, front. The front lot line on a corner lot shall be the line with the shortest frontage unless, at the time of development, the longer frontage is designated by the owner to be the front. When a lot runs through from one (1) street to another, both lot lines shall be construed to be front lot lines, and the lot may have no rear lot line.

Lot lines. The property lines bounding the lot.

Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the lot boundaries or the mean distance between the side lot lines within the buildable area.

SEC. 36.60.41. - Definitions - "S."

Setback. The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a street right-of-way, to the nearest vertical wall or other element of a building or structure as defined herein.

SEC. 36.60.53. - Definitions - "Y."

Yard, front. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.

a. Front yard, least depth. The shortest distance measured horizontally between the closest part of the nearest building, other than such parts herein excepted, and the front lot line.

1. Front yard, least depth, how measured. Such depth shall be measured from the right-of-way line of the existing street on which the lot fronts (the lot front line) provided, however, that if a precise plan line has been officially adopted, and it differs from the existing right-of-way line of the existing street, then the required front yard least depth shall be measured from the precise plan line of such street as adopted.

Yard, rear. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in the chapter.

a. Rear yard, least depth. The shortest distance measured horizontally between the closest part of the nearest building, other than such parts here in excepted, and the rear lot line.

Yard, side. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.

a. Side yard, least width. The shortest distance, measured horizontally between the closest part of the nearest building, other than such parts herein-after excepted, and the nearest side lot line.

1. Side yard, least width, how measured. Such width shall be measured from the nearest side lot line and in case the nearest side lot line is a side street lot line, from the right-of-way line of the existing street provided, however, that if a precise plan line has been officially adopted, and it differs from the existing right-of-way line of the existing street, then the required side yard least width shall be measured from the precise plan line of such street as adopted.

(Ord. No. 18.13, § 1, 12/10/13.)
