§ 20.90.010 Purpose.

It is the intent of these regulations to provide opportunities for new accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior ADUs (JADUs) consistent with state law and local regulations. ADUs and JADUs are intended to provide independent living units for family members, students, the elderly, in-home health and childcare providers, and others within existing residential neighborhoods.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021)

§ 20.90.020 Definitions.

See Chapter 20.08.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021)

§ 20.90.030 General requirements and restrictions for ADUs and JADUs.

A. General Requirements. An ADU and JADU shall comply with the following requirements:

1. One ADU may be constructed on a lot zoned to allow single family or multiple family dwelling residential use.

2. One JADU may be constructed per residential lot in zoning districts permitting single family dwelling residential use.

3. One JADU and one ADU may be constructed on a single family residential lot where the JADU and ADU meet the requirements in Government Code Section 65852.2(e).

4. Multiple converted or detached ADUs may be constructed on a lot with an existing multiple family dwelling, where consistent with Government Code Section 65852.2(e)(1)(C) and (D).

5. All proposed ADUs and JADUs must satisfy all applicable building, fire and safety standards, including, but not limited to, fire lane widths, minimum fire flows and emergency egress, as set forth in the California Building Standards Code and MVMC Titles 14 and 15.

6. All ADUs and JADUs located in the floodplain shall comply with Title 18 of this Code.

7. If the construction of an ADU is proposed within 30 feet of the top of the bank for any watercourse identified in Chapter 20.76, the applicant shall provide the Building Department with all applicable permits from outside agencies, including, but not limited to, the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board, California Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Army Corps of Engineers, State Water Resources Control Board and/or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

8. A permanent address is required for an ADU.

9. Prior to receiving a building permit for an ADU, the local water or sewer agency shall submit letters of service availability for water and sewer disposal to the Building Official.

10. Any ADU or JADU legally created shall be governed by the zoning regulations in effect at the time of approval.

11. The overall height of an ADU is defined as the vertical distance of the lowest exterior wall measured from finished grade to the highest point of the unit, which may be the ceiling in the case of an ADU located in the basement or lower floor of a single family or multi-family dwelling, or the roof ridge in the case of a detached ADU or ADU on the top floor.

12. ADUs that qualify for reduced rear and side setbacks under Government Code Section 65852.2 and are located on double frontage or corner lot shall use the following criteria to determine rear and side setbacks.

a. Double frontage, through lots shall maintain the exterior yard setback for the primary frontage containing either the driveway encroachment or in association with the orientation of the home. The opposite frontage shall be considered the "rear yard" for purposes of Government Code Section 65852.2.

b. Corner lots with frontage on two streets shall maintain the exterior yard setback for the primary frontage containing either the driveway or orientation of the home; the remaining street frontage shall be considered the "side yard" for purposes of Government Code Section 65852.2.

B. Restrictions. All ADUs and JADUs shall be subject to the following restrictions:

1. The development and use of the ADU or JADU shall only be valid and permitted based on the terms established in the chapter.

2. A deed restriction shall be required for all ADUs or JADUs. Prior to obtaining a building permit for an ADU or JADU, a deed restriction shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office, which shall include the restrictions and limitations identified in this section. Said deed restriction shall run with the land and shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property. A copy of the final recorded deed restriction shall be filed with the Planning Department prior to the final inspection for the construction of the project, stating that:

a. The ADU or JADU shall not be sold separately from the primary residence, except as permitted by Government Code Section 65852.26.

b. If the ADU or JADU is rented, it shall not be rented for a period of less than 30 consecutive days.

c. The ADU or JADU shall be restricted to the gross floor area granted at the time of building permit. Any owner wishing to incorporate the gross floor area of the ADU or JADU back into the primary dwelling unit must request termination of the ADU or JADU use under this chapter, satisfying all zoning and development standards such as setbacks, floor area and lot coverage.

d. The owner and all successors in interest in the subject property shall agree to respond to the City of Mill Valley's annual survey of owners of all ADUs or JADUs to determine use, code consistency and for reporting purposes to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).

e. The owner and all successors in interest in the subject property shall maintain the ADU or JADU in accordance with all applicable regulations established in this chapter. Violations and lack of compliance with any provisions of this section may result in legal action against the property owner, including revocation of any right to maintain an ADU or JADU on the property as outlined in Sections 20.90.070 to 20.90.080, and shall be subject to administrative fines and penalties as contained in Chapter 8.02 of the Mill Valley Municipal Code.

f. JADUs only: Owner-occupancy is required for parcels with a JADU, consistent with Section 20.90.060.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021)

§ 20.90.040 Process, review and fees for ADUs and JADUs.

A. Projects Exempt from Obtaining an ADU Permit.

1. As provided under Government Code Section 65852.2(e)(1), an owner shall not be required to submit an application for an ADU permit under subsection B below, and may instead seek building permit approval for the following types of units that are located within residential or mixeduse zones:

a. Junior ADUs meeting the requirements of Government Code Sections 65852.2(e)(1)(A) and 65852.22.

b. Converted ADUs meeting the requirements of Government Code Sections 65852.2(e)(1)(A) or 65852.2(e)(1)(C).

c. New construction of detached ADUs meeting the requirements of Government Code Sections 65852.2(e)(1)(B) or 65852.2(e)(1)(D).

2. Projects that are exempt from obtaining an ADU permit under this provision are still subject to tree removal permit, grading permit, and other applicable construction-related permit requirements.

B. Projects Subject to ADU Permit Review and Timelines.

1. The planning director or his or her designee shall ministerially review and approve an ADU permit application and shall not require a public hearing, provided that the submitted application is complete and demonstrates that the ADU complies with the requirements contained in this Title 20, including Chapter 20.67.

2. ADU permit applications subject to ministerial approval shall be processed within the timelines established by California Government Code Section 65852.2.

3. Where an ADU permit application is submitted with an application for a single family dwelling or multiple family dwelling that is subject to design review under Chapter 20.66, the ADU permit application will be considered separately without discretionary review or a public hearing, following action on the portion of the project subject to Chapter 20.66.

4. In addition to obtaining an ADU permit, the applicant shall be required to obtain a building permit, tree removal permit if applicable, and other applicable construction permit requirements prior to the construction of the unit.

C. Fees.

1. The owner of an ADU or JADU shall be subject to the payment of all sewer, water and other applicable fees except as specifically provided in California Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021)

§ 20.90.050 ADU development standards and objective design guidelines.

Except for those ADUs approved under Section 20.90.040(A), an ADU shall comply with the following development standards. Exceptions to the development standards may be requested and granted through the discretionary design review process in Chapter 20.66.

A. Development Standards.

1. An ADU shall conform to all lot coverage, adjusted floor area, and setback regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the property is located, except in the following cases:

a. ADUs or JADUs that are not required to obtain an ADU permit as provided under Section 20.90.040(A).

b. Where the application of lot coverage, adjusted floor area, and setback violates Government Code Section 65852.2(c)(2)(C).

c. No setback shall be required for a converted ADU that is within an existing structure or that is within a structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing structure. For all other ADUs, the maximum required setback from side and rear lot lines shall be four feet.

d. Exterior structures such as a deck, breezeway or trellis must comply with the setbacks for the applicable zoning district.

2. Studio and one-bedroom ADUs shall not exceed 850 square feet of gross floor area. ADUs with more than one bedroom shall be limited to a maximum of 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, except for those internal converted ADUs that are within the existing walls of a primary single-family residence, which shall be limited to a maximum of 1,200 square feet of gross floor area.

3. If there is an existing primary dwelling, an attached ADU shall not exceed 50% of the maximum adjusted floor area for the primary dwelling as calculated in Section 20.16.040(A)(2) for the subject lot, but in no case shall the ADU be less than 150 square feet, nor more than 1,000 square feet in gross floor area.

4. A detached ADU shall not exceed 16 feet in height; or, when located above a garage, the combined height of the ADU and the garage shall not exceed 25 feet.

B. Architectural Style and Building Form.

1. An ADU shall include permanent provisions for living and sleeping, including a closet or other storage.

2. The following architectural details of the ADU shall be reflective of the architectural style of the primary residence: window design, roof pitch, materials, colors, finish texture, doorway design, and trim.

3. Lighting shall be shielded or directed downward and in such a way that it is not visible at the property lines.

4. Windows shall not be located with a direct line of sight to windows of adjacent properties. Obscured glass, clerestory windows, and other techniques may be used to avoid line of sight.

5. An ADU shall have a separate exterior access. The exterior access shall be a standard exterior door and shall be located in a manner that will preserve, to the greatest extent feasible, the privacy of the primary residence, other accessory structures and any adjoining residences.

6. A permanent foundation shall be required for all ADUs.

C. Off-Street Parking.

1. In addition to the off-street parking space(s) required for the primary residence, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each ADU, except when:

a. The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit. For purposes of this chapter, "public transit" has the same meaning as in Government Code Section 65852.2(j).

b. The ADU is entirely within a proposed or existing primary dwelling or other existing structure.

c. The ADU is located within a historic district.

d. On-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.

e. There is a City-approved and dedicated parking space for a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU.

2. When the ADU is created by converting or demolishing a garage, carport or covered parking structure, replacement of parking space(s) eliminated by the construction of the ADU shall not be required as long as the ADU remains in use as a legal ADU. If the ADU is removed from use, the single family dwelling unit shall be required to comply with parking standards established in Chapter 20.61, as well as all other development standards applicable to the zoning district.

3. The location of the required parking space(s) shall not obstruct the parking of the primary residence and shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. The required parking spaces for the ADU may be uncovered. Parking may be provided within the front setback between an existing driveway and the closest side of the property line if the slope of the site is 10% or less, with the approval of the planning director.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021; Ord. 1362, 11/17/2025)

§ 20.90.060 JADU development standards.

Junior accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following:

A. Owner Occupancy.

1. The owner of a parcel proposed for a JADU shall occupy as a principal residence either the single family dwelling unit or the JADU. The JADU shall be considered legal only so long as the owner occupies either the single family dwelling unit or the JADU.

2. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) above, owner-occupancy shall not be required if the owner is another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.

B. Development Standards.

1. The JADU shall be a minimum of 150 square feet and a maximum of 500 square feet of gross floor area. The gross floor area of a shared sanitation facility shall not be included in the maximum gross floor area of the JADU.

2. One JADU may be constructed on a lot zoned for single-family residential use, where there is a single-family dwelling unit existing or proposed to be built on the lot. The JADU must be contained entirely within the walls of the existing or proposed single family dwelling unit.

3. The JADU shall include an efficiency kitchen meeting the requirements of California Government Code Section 65852.22.

4. A separate exterior entry from the main entrance to the single-family dwelling shall be provided to serve a JADU.

5. An interior entry to the main living area shall be provided to serve a JADU. Such interior entry may include a second interior doorway for sound attenuation.

6. A JADU may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

7. Any exterior improvements associated with the development of a JADU shall conform to zoning regulations and any existing land use entitlements on the property.

C. Parking. No additional parking is required for a JADU.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021)

§ 20.90.070 Termination of permit and use for ADUs and JADUs.

A. No building permit shall be issued to remove permanent features of an ADU or JADU, including the provisions for eating, cooking and sanitation, and separate exterior entrance until written approval to terminate the use of living space as an ADU or JADU is granted by the Planning Department.

B. At its discretion, the Planning Director may grant an owner's written request to terminate an ADU or JADU and deed restriction. The planning director shall consider the length of time such permit has been in force, the conditions of approval, the exceptions granted for the ADU or JADU, and the impact on the City's affordable housing supply.

C. As a condition of termination, the Planning Director shall require the owner to make modifications to the property to comply with: (1) current building code requirements; and (2) current development standards in effect at the time the request is made to terminate use, including, but not limited to, setbacks, heights, parking and adjusted floor area. The owner shall apply for a building permit to make such modifications as required by the City's building and fire codes.

D. In no case shall the ADU or JADU be terminated, if the proposed termination would require a variance to exceed adjusted floor area for the single family dwelling unit.

E. Requests to terminate an ADU created from either: (1) the conversion of space including a garage, carport or covered parking structure; or (2) the exemption from lot coverage or floor area: an ADU may be terminated, should the owner illustrate compliance with off-street parking requirements established in Chapter 20.61, as well as all applicable development standards for the zoning district, including, but not limited to: height, setback and allowable floor area.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021; Ord. 1362, 11/17/2025)

§ 20.90.080 Violations and enforcement for ADUs and JADUs.

A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. An ADU or JADU will be found in violation of this chapter when the dwelling unit has been created without the required City approvals or does not comply with standards and deed restrictions established in this chapter. Violations are subject to the enforcement penalties and procedures of Chapter 8.02 of this Code.

B. In addition to the enforcement penalties and procedures included in Chapter 8.02 of this Code, the City may pursue any remedies provided by law against the owner of an ADU or JADU found to be in violation of this chapter, or an ADU or JADU not maintained in conformance with this chapter including:

1. Revocation of the ADU or JADU permit;

2. Where an ADU or JADU has been improperly terminated and is being used as habitable space for the primary dwelling unit, removal of the floor area serving as habitable space may be required; and

3. In any civil enforcement action, the City is entitled to recover attorneys' fees and costs from an owner who is determined to have an illegal ADU or JADU or is in violation of this chapter.

(Ord. 1330 § 2, November 15, 2021)
