Chapter 17.24 - REQUIRED SETBACK AREAS^[4]

17.24.010 - General rules.

A. Except as otherwise set forth in these general rules, no structure placed, erected, or constructed on private property shall be located in the setback areas as described in Section 17.24.020.

B. Subject to subsection C. below, the following accessory structures may be located within setback areas as indicated:

1. Retaining walls, provided that the maximum height allowed is six feet in the street-line setback area (as defined in Section 17.24.020 A. and B.) and four and one-half feet in the interior setback area (as defined in Section 17.24.020 C., measured as set forth in Section 12.12.050. Terraced retaining walls shall be horizontally separated by a minimum distance of five feet and shall include landscape screening. Exposed faces of retaining walls shall be screened with landscaping. Landscape screening for retaining walls is subject to the design review process.

2. Water wells, provided that they are a minimum of five feet from any property line and that all associated equipment meets the standards for accessory structures as outlined in Section 17.24.010. as well as all other applicable permitting and code requirements of outside agencies including, but not limited to, those of the San Mateo County Health Department.

3. Decks, stairs, landings no higher than eighteen inches, ponds (a pond being a pool of water no more than eighteen inches deep), walkways, patios, terraces, driveways, benches, and railings.

4. Any outdoor fixture meeting the requirements of Chapter 12.12 of this code and all other applicable laws and regulations.

5. In the total combined setback areas of a lot, one enclosed structure not exceeding forty square feet in floor area if:

a. The structure is no more than six feet high; and

b. The structure is no closer than five feet from any lot line; and

c. The structure is at least forty feet from any adjoining residence; and

d. The structure is more than twenty-five feet from any street line; and

e. The adjoining affected property owner(s) (i.e., the owner(s) whose property is adjacent to the proposed structure) has indicated in writing that the affected owner has no objection to the proposed location.

6. Unenclosed structures (such as tennis or other courts, play structures, arbors, swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs) if:

a. The structure is no more than eight feet high, provided, however, that any structure more than six feet high is subject to prior design review approval as set forth in Chapter 2.12; and

b. The structure is no closer than five feet from any lot line; and

c. The structure is at least forty feet from any adjoining residence; and

d. The structure is more than twenty-five feet from any street line; and

e. The adjoining affected property owner(s) (i.e., the owner(s) whose property is adjacent to the proposed structure) has indicated in writing that the affected owner has no objection to the proposed location.

C. No structure shall be located over a public utility easement except that a fence not over seven feet high may be so located, and, if the entity owning the easement has given prior written approval, a retaining wall not over four and one-half feet high may be so located.

D. Architectural features such as bay windows, chimneys, and overhanging eaves may encroach a maximum of twenty-four inches into street-line and interior setback areas.

E. Solar Energy Systems, as defined in the California Civil Code Section 801.5(a) or successor provision, are exempt from the requirements of this section but shall be no closer than five feet from any property line. Additionally, solar energy systems shall be subject to all applicable Federal, State and Hillsborough Municipal Code health and safety requirements.

(Ord. 683 § 8, 2008: Ord. 639 § 17, 2003)

(Ord. No. 692, § 4, 9-3-2010; Ord. No. 761, § 15, 1-13-2020; Ord. No. 766, § 2, 9-14-2020; Ord. No. 767, § 2, 10-12-2020)

17.24.020 - Location of setback areas.

A. The street-line setback area is that twenty-five foot wide strip of land that is bounded on one side by the street line and on the other side by a parallel line on the lot and twenty-five feet distant from the street line, such parallel line continuing until either end of it abuts a lot line. If the lot is bounded by more than one street line, the area bounded by all street lines and their parallel lines twenty-five feet distant constitutes the street-line setback areas of the lot. The provisions of this paragraph are illustrated by the first diagram following the next paragraph.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A. of this section.

1. On property having frontage along a street or right-of-way established by easement (as opposed to dedication in fee), whether public or private, the outside boundary of the street-line setback area shall be the line between the easement and the remainder of the private property unencumbered by the easement, as illustrated by the second diagram below.

17.24.020: Location of setback areas (shown in plan view)

17.24.020A:

Example, on a corner lot, of street line setback areas where the "street" is a dedicated right-of-way.

17.24.020B.1:

Example, on a corner lot, of street line setback areas where the "streets" are easements for right-of-way purposes, rather than a dedicated right-of-way.

2. On property having frontage along a street or right-of-way established by public use, the outside boundary of the street-line setback area shall be the edge of the paved street abutting the private property in question.

C. The interior setback area is that twenty-foot wide strip of land that is bounded on one side by a lot line that is not a street line and on the other side by a parallel line located on the lot and twenty feet distant from the lot line, such parallel line continuing until either end of it abuts a lot line. If the lot is bounded by more than one lot line that is not a street line, the area bounded by all such lot lines and their parallel lines twenty feet distant constitutes the interior setback areas of the lot. Any lot area that, pursuant to the descriptions in this section, falls within both the street-line setback area and the interior setback area shall be deemed part of the street-line setback area and not part of the interior setback area. The provisions of this paragraph are illustrated by the following diagram:

17.24.020C: Location of setback areas (shown in plan view):

Example of some interior and street line setback areas. Note that, for clarity, not all of the setback areas are shown for Lots A, B, and D.

D. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, no part of any dwelling shall be erected closer than fifty feet from the center line of any right-of-way; provided, however, that the maximum distance required by this paragraph between any part of the dwelling and the street line shall be thirty feet. (Any dwelling legally erected prior to the effective date of this subsection and not conforming to the provisions of this paragraph shall be a legal nonconforming structure and may be enlarged, reconstructed, or otherwise altered so long as the resulting dwelling is not any closer to the center line of any right-of-way and not any closer to the street line than the dwelling was prior to the alteration.) The provisions of this paragraph are illustrated by the following diagrams:

17.24.020D. Setback distances for dwellings (shown in plan view):

Example where the "street" is a dedicated right-of-way.

Example where the "street" is an easement for right-of-way purposes, rather than a dedicated right-of-way.

E. The diagrams in this section are illustrative only and not part of the ordinance.

F. Homes Eight Thousand Square Feet and Greater. On property improved with a single-family residence eight thousand square feet or greater in size, the street line and interior setbacks shall be increased in the aggregate by fifteen feet beyond what would otherwise be required under this chapter, with a minimum of five feet being added to the street-line setback and the balance being added to the interior setback.

(Ord. 683 § 9, 2008; Ord. 639 § 17, 2003)

17.24.030 - Measurement.

A. In determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the distance between a lot line and a structure located on the lot shall be measured along a line perpendicular to the lot line beginning at the lot line and continuing to the nearest measuring point (as defined in subsection B of this section) of the structure.

B. 1. The edge of the pavement on tennis and other play courts shall be the measuring point for such structures.

2. The edge of the coping, if any, of a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub shall be the measuring point. If there is no coping, the edge of the water in a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub shall be the measuring point.

3. The nearest exterior wall shall be the measuring point for buildings.

4. For all other structures, the edge of the structure shall be the measuring point.

(Ord. 639 § 17, 2003)

Chapter 17.28 - HEIGHT LIMITATIONS*

17.28.010 - Building envelope.

A building envelope shall be established at every setback line, out of which no structure except chimneys shall penetrate; provided, however, that when Section 17.24.020(D) applies to a dwelling, the building envelope shall be established at that line past which no part of the dwelling may be erected. The envelope shall commence at existing grade at all setback lines, rising to a height of twenty-two feet directly above grade, then extending at a slope of forty-five degrees inward (away from the property line) to a maximum height of thirty-two feet measured from a warped plane parallel to existing grade. The following diagrams illustrates the building envelope profile, including the thirty-two foot height limitation, for zero and thirty percent slopes.

In the case of land that has not been altered from its natural state, "existing grade" means the natural grade. In the case of land that has previously been subject to grading, as defined in Section 15.24.020, "existing grade" means the grade that existed (as reasonably determined by the building department) five years prior to the date of the application for the building permit for the project for which the building envelope is being calculated.

(Ord. 657 § 3, 2005; Ord. 639 § 18 (part), 2003)

17.28.020 - Outdoor fixtures other than retaining walls.

The height limitations for outdoor fixtures other than retaining walls are set forth in Chapter 12.12.

(Ord. 639 § 18 (part), 2003)

17.28.030 - Retaining walls.

The maximum allowable retaining wall height shall be six feet or such lesser height as set forth in Sections 12.12.050(B), 17.24.010(B)(1), and 17.24.010(C) as applicable.

(Ord. 639 § 18 (part), 2003)

Chapter 17.32 - RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE SIZE AND LOT COVERAGE*

17.32.010 - Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the size of single-family dwellings and accessory structures and to provide for review by the city council of very large homes. This chapter does not apply to private schools, country clubs, private clubs, public facilities, and other structures not associated with single-family dwellings.

(Ord. 639 § 20 (part), 2003)

17.32.020 - Total covered floor area.

A. For purposes of Sections 17.32.030 and 17.32.040, the phrase "total covered floor area" shall mean the total area of all buildings on the lot (except for excluded accessory structures listed in this section) measured to the exterior wall lines thereof (i.e., the outside edge of exterior walls). This shall include all roofed areas with a level floor-to-ceiling height of at least seven feet, including basements as set forth in subsection C of this section, closets, stairwells, bay windows, turrets, and other projections bounded by two or more exterior walls, plus the additional amount of square footage, if any, specified by subsections B and D of this section. For purposes of this chapter, floor area includes finished or unfinished floor area. The foregoing notwithstanding, the following accessory structures shall be excluded from (i.e., not counted in) the floor area calculation: trellises, open gazebos, open pergolas, open decks, carports open on at least two sides, and other structures of a similar type as determined by the town's planning office.

B. For rooms or areas with low sloping ceilings, such as attics, all floor areas with a level floor-to-ceiling height of at least five feet shall be counted as floor area.

C. For basement areas with exterior walls less than two feet above the surrounding natural grade, thirty-three percent of all floor areas with a level floor-to-ceiling height of at least six feet shall be counted as floor area. For basement areas with exterior walls two feet or more above the surrounding natural grade, one hundred percent of all floor areas with a level floor-to-ceiling height of at least six feet shall be counted as floor area. The height of exterior basement walls shall be measured from the surrounding natural grade to the plate height of the ground-level floor above.

D. For spaces with high ceilings, one hundred and fifty percent of all floor area (after the first three hundred square feet, which shall be counted at one hundred percent) with a floor-to-ceiling height greater than twelve feet shall be counted as floor area.

(Ord. 657 § 4, 2005; Ord. 639 § 20 (part), 2003)

17.32.030 - Minimum and maximum dwelling size; FAR.

A. The total covered floor area shall be at least twenty-five hundred square feet.

B. The total covered floor area shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the net lot area for the first acre plus fifteen percent of the net lot area over one acre. This percentage is known as the floor area ratio ("FAR") and is calculated by dividing the total covered floor area (in square feet) by the net lot area (in square feet).

C. When five hundred square feet or less remain in the allowable floor area, a notice (prepared by the town) shall be recorded by the property owner to notify future owners that the square footage remaining for additional development of the property is minimal and that the building department should therefore be consulted as to whether any additional development is possible on the property.

(Ord. 639 § 20 (part), 2003)

17.32.040 - Floor area in excess of eight thousand square feet.

A. Except as set forth in subsection G. of this section, the design of any new primary dwelling having a total covered floor area, as defined in subsection 17.32.020.A, in excess of eight thousand square feet shall not be deemed approved or conditionally approved, regardless of any recommendation of the architecture and design review board or the lack of a timely and proper appeal, until the project has been submitted to the city council for review and final disposition.

B. New primary dwellings having a total covered floor area in excess of eight thousand square feet shall be submitted to the city council as follows: the submittal shall include, but not be limited to, all the written documentation that was presented to the architecture and design review board for its consideration, as well as the written record of the architecture and design review board's action.

C. The submittal to the city council shall be noticed in the same manner as was required for the architecture and design review board's consideration of the project.

D. The city council's review shall include a public hearing and shall consider the following:

1. The project's compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and policies.

2. The recommendation of the architecture and design review board.

3. The project's aesthetic compatibility with the site and the neighborhood, including, without limitation, the impact of such square footage on the site and the neighborhood.

E. The city council shall either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the project, or instruct the applicant to make revisions to the design and resubmit it to the architecture and design review board for additional review.

F. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, following design review by the architecture and design review board, the city planner may determine, in consultation with the commissioner for the planning office, that the city council review set forth in this section is not necessary because (i) there is no unresolved opposition to or concern about the project raised in the public hearing before the architecture and design review board and (ii) the project was approved by the architecture and design review board with no dissenting votes.

(Ord. 654 § 23, 2004; Ord. 639 § 20 (part), 2003)

(Ord. No. 715, § 10, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 761, § 16, 1-13-2020)

17.32.050 - Number and size of accessory structures.

There is no limitation on the number of accessory structures that may be allowed on a lot; provided, however, that each covered accessory structure shall not exceed one thousand square feet in floor area, except as otherwise set forth in Sections 17.52.020(C)(5) and (C)(6).

(Ord. 654 § 25, 2004; Ord. 648 § 8, 2003; Ord. 639 § 20 (part), 2003)

17.32.060 - Residential lot coverage.

A. For purposes of this chapter, there are three types of residential lot coverage: Structural coverage, hardscape coverage, and softscape coverage.

1. Structural coverage consists of areas of the lot covered by a house, a garage, a carport, and any other accessory structure having more than one wall and a roof. These shall be measured to their exterior wall lines or exterior supporting columns, but shall not include porches, entries, porticos, balconies, and the like (if such porches, entries, porticos, balconies, and the like are roofed and open on at least two sides) and shall not include roof overhangs, if all these excluded items together do not exceed, in area, ten percent of the maximum permitted structural coverage. Structural coverage is often referred to as the "footprint" of the above-described structures on the lot.

2. Hardscape coverage consists of areas of the lot located beneath a roof or covered by manufactured, non-plant pervious or impervious materials but does not include anything included in structural coverage.

a. "Impervious surface" means any constructed surface that prevents the passage of water into the underlying soil or otherwise significantly increases runoff. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, concrete, asphalt, brick or other stone materials set in sand or concrete.

b. "Pervious" or porous materials used for walkways, driveways and patios may receive certain exceptions from site coverage as provided for in this chapter if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed material allows the passage of water into the underlying soil, the area of that material would be counted at fifty percent of the total area of such surface(s) for determining the calculation of lot coverage.

3. Softscape coverage consists of all lot coverage that is not structural coverage or hardscape coverage. Examples of softscape are live trees, shrubs, lawns, live plant material, dirt, indigenous grasses and woodland, or "decorative landscaping." Examples of decorative landscaping are non-live materials such as rocks, gravel, decomposed granite, mulch, or bark and does not include asphalt, cement or any other impervious surface.

B. The maximum surface area of a lot that may be covered by structural coverage is as follows:

| Lot Size (Net Lot Area) | Maximum Area of Lot Permitted To Be Covered |
| Up to 17,500 sq. ft. | 22 sq. ft. for each 100 sq. ft. or portion thereof of net lot area |
| 17,500 up to 21,780 sq. ft. | 3,850 sq. ft. plus 15 sq. ft. for each 100 sq. ft. or portion thereof of net lot area in excess of 17,500 sq. ft. |
| 21,780 up to 32,670 sq. ft. | 4,495 sq. ft. plus 10 sq. ft. for each 100 sq. ft. or portion thereof of net lot area in excess of 21,780 sq. ft. |
| 32,670 through 43,560 sq. ft. | 5,585 sq. ft. plus 6 sq. ft. for each 100 sq. ft. or portion thereof of net lot area in excess of 32,670 sq. ft. |
| Over 43,560 sq. ft. | 6,239 sq. ft. plus 5 sq. ft. for each 100 sq. ft. or portion thereof of net lot area in excess of 43,560 sq. ft. |

C. Subject to the provisions of paragraph B of this section, the combined total of structural plus hardscape coverage shall not exceed fifty percent of the net lot area; provided, however, that in any setback area adjacent to the street line, the combined total of structural plus hardscape coverage shall not exceed forty percent of such area.

D. Softscape coverage is subject to the limitations set forth in Section 17.56.040.

(Ord. 639 § 20 (part), 2003)

(Ord. No. 692, § 5, 9-13-2010; Ord. No. 761, § 17, 1-13-2020)
