§ 4.10.015. - Accessory dwelling units.

This section refers to uses classified as Accessory Dwelling Units, which includes Standard ADUs, Movable Tiny Homes, and Junior ADUs, as set forth in § 2.10.030. Such uses are subject to all of the following provisions:

A. Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a valuable and relatively affordable form of housing for family members, the elderly, students, in-home health care providers, individuals with disabilities, and others, within existing neighborhoods and on existing legal lots. It is intended to regulate such housing units to ensure that they are relatively unobtrusive on the site, do not significantly impact adjacent properties, and do not diminish neighborhood character. This section and all other provisions of the zoning ordinance and Ordinance Code are intended to be consistent with, and shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with state law, including, but not limited to Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22, as those laws may be amended from time to time. If any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or Ordinance Code are in conflict with state law, then those provisions shall be void and state law shall apply.

B. General Provisions. All accessory dwelling units, including standard ADUs, Junior ADUs, and movable tiny homes, are required to comply with all of the following provisions. For the purposes of this section, one movable tiny home per lot is allowed in lieu of one standard ADU:

1. Only one accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling unit are allowed per legal lot, with the exception of ADUs within existing multifamily dwelling units pursuant to subsections 4.10.015(C) and 4.10.015(D). See § 4.10.387 and the Urban Primary Unit use classification for limits on the total number of dwelling units, including ADUs and Junior ADUs.

2. Ministerial building permit applications to establish an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit shall be reviewed by all applicable County departments and other public agencies for conformance with applicable standards and requirements and either approved or disapproved within 60 days after the County receives a complete application.

3. No standard ADU or junior ADU may be sold separately from the primary residence or the real property upon which the primary residence is located. This provision does not apply to property built or developed by a qualified nonprofit corporation described in Government Code Section 65852.26.

4. No building site approval pursuant to Ordinance Code Section C12-300 et seq. shall be required for accessory dwelling units. However, building site approval is required for the existing or proposed primary residence on the lot and shall be obtained before a building permit application for the accessory dwelling unit is submitted. Except where expressly exempt or otherwise provided in this Section 4.10.015, accessory dwelling units are subject to all other applicable requirements of the Ordinance Code, including, but not limited to, requirements applicable to on-site wastewater treatment systems or sewer connections, water supply, setbacks, and height limitations.

5. Accessory dwelling units shall not be rented for terms shorter than 30 days.

C. Attached Accessory Dwelling Units. An attached accessory dwelling unit is a standard accessory dwelling unit that shares a roof, a foundation, and a common wall of at least eight horizontal feet with the primary residence. It also includes a dwelling unit located entirely within the living area of the primary residence. Attached accessory dwelling units are subject to all of the following provisions:

1. Legally established primary residences that are 1,600 square feet or less, shall be allowed to have an attached ADU of no more than 800 square feet (Government Code section 65852.2(c)(2)(C)). Primary residences that are 1,601—2,400 square feet shall be allowed to have an attached ADU of no more than 50 percent of the legally established primary residence (Government Code section 65852.2(a)(1)(D)(iv)). Legally established primary residences exceeding 2,400 square feet shall be allowed to have an attached ADU of no more than 1,200 square feet (Government Code section 65852.2(c)).

2. Shall be setback at least four feet from side and rear lot lines, and shall be subject to the same front yard setback as the primary residence, with the exception of conversions as stated in subsection 4.10.015(H).

3. Shall not exceed 16 feet in height if the dwelling unit does not comply with the setback limitations for a single-family residence, prescribed by the applicable zoning district.

If the accessory dwelling unit complies with the setback limitations for a single-family residence, the accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the same height limitations as the single-family residence in the applicable zoning district, as measured from the lowest finished grade to the highest point of the structure.

4. Accessory dwelling units are allowed within the areas of a legally established multifamily dwelling structure that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, provided each accessory dwelling unit complies with state building standards for dwellings. At least one accessory dwelling unit may be attached within an existing multifamily dwelling structure. However, additional accessory dwelling units may not exceed 25 percent of the existing legally established multifamily dwelling units. This provision shall only be applied once per property.

D. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. A detached accessory dwelling unit is a structure that is separated from the primary residence by no less than six horizontal feet. Detached accessory dwelling units are subject to all the following provisions:

1. Shall have a maximum floor area not exceeding 1,200 square feet.

2. Shall be setback at least four feet from side and rear lot lines, and shall be subject to the same front yard setback as the primary residence, with the exception of conversions as stated in Section 4.10.015(H).

3. Shall not exceed 16 feet in height if the dwelling unit does not comply with the setback limitations for a single-family residence, as prescribed by the applicable zoning district.

If the accessory dwelling unit complies with the setback limitations for a single-family residence, the accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the same height limitations as the single-family residence in the applicable zoning district, as measured from the lowest finished grade to the highest point of the structure.

Detached accessory dwelling units exceeding 16 feet in height shall incorporate a hip, gable, or other similar styled roof design.

4. An attached garage or carport of up to 400 square feet in floor area may be incorporated in the design of a detached accessory dwelling unit, provided the dwelling portion of the building does not exceed the applicable maximum floor area for the detached accessory dwelling unit (1,200 square feet).

5. Decks and porches, covered or uncovered, that are attached to a detached accessory dwelling unit are limited to a cumulative 400 square feet beyond the applicable maximum dwelling size (1,200 square feet). This limitation does not apply to any portion of an uncovered deck that is less than 30 inches above finished grade.

6. An attached junior accessory dwelling unit of up to an additional 500 square feet in floor area may be incorporated into a detached accessory dwelling unit. The cumulative square footage of both accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 1,700 square feet.

7. For properties with a multifamily dwelling, no more than two detached accessory dwelling units may be located on the same property.

E. Movable Tiny Homes. Movable tiny homes are subject to all of the following provisions:

1. Shall adhere to all setback, height, and floor area limitations pursuant to Section 4.10.015(D).

2. Shall be a self-contained unit that complies with all State of California requirements, is constructed in compliance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 119.5 standard as certified by an accredited qualified third-party inspector, and is licensed and registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

3. Shall not move under its own power.

4. Shall be no larger than allowed by state law for movement on public highways.

5. Shall have at least 100 square feet of enclosed space.

6. Shall be directly connected to an approved water source, an onsite wastewater treatment system or sanitary sewer system, and electric utilities. Holding tanks that are incorporated into the original design of the structure shall not be used for the purposes of waste storage, and shall be directly connected to the approved onsite wastewater treatment system or sanitary sewer.

7. The undercarriage (wheels, axles, tongue and hitch) shall be hidden from view.

8. All wheels and leveling or support jacks shall sit on a surface acceptable to the County Building Official or designee.

9. Mechanical equipment shall be incorporated into the original design of the structure, and shall not be located on the roof or added on to the exterior of the unit.

10. Shall have the following design elements to maintain the character of the residential neighborhood:

a. Shall not include corrugated aluminum or fiberglass siding and shall not be a shipping container or cargo container.

b. Shall use cladding and trim materials on the exterior of movable tiny homes for residential appearance and to provide adequate thermal insulation and weather resistance. Materials may include, but are not limited to, single piece composite, vinyl siding, laminates, or interlocked sheathing.

c. Windows shall be at least double pane glass and labeled for building use, and shall include exterior trim.

F. Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. Junior accessory dwelling units are subject to all of the following provisions:

1. Shall be contained entirely within a single-family residence or a standard accessory dwelling unit.

2. When located within a single-family residence, the junior accessory dwelling unit shall adhere to all setback and height limitations pursuant to subsections 4.10.015(C)(2) and 4.10.015(C)(3).

When located within a standard accessory dwelling unit, the junior accessory dwelling unit shall adhere to all setback and height limitations pursuant to subsections 4.10.015(D)(2) and 4.10.015(D)(3).

3. Shall contain a full kitchen or an efficiency kitchen consisting of cooking facilities with appliances, food preparation counters, and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size.

4. Owner-occupancy of one unit is required in any single-family residence that contains a junior accessory dwelling unit. The owner may reside in either the single-family residence or the junior accessory dwelling unit. Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the owner is a governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.

5. No parking space is required for a junior accessory dwelling unit. [See subsection 4.10.015(I).]

G. Standard accessory dwelling units attached to accessory structures, excluding garage(s). A standard accessory dwelling unit may be attached to an accessory structure provided that the habitable space of the standard accessory dwelling unit does not exceed a maximum size of 1,200 square feet. A standard accessory dwelling unit with a junior accessory dwelling unit that is attached to an accessory structure shall comply with subsection 4.10.015(D)(6).

1. The portion of the structure utilized as a dwelling unit shall comply with the height and setback regulations in subsection 4.10.015(D)(2).

2. There shall be no interior access connecting the dwelling unit portion of the structure to the non-dwelling portion of the structure. The common walls (including the floor and ceiling) between any dwelling unit portion and any non-dwelling portion shall comply with all fire separation requirements. Restrictions on heating, plumbing and/or electricity, the layout and partitioning of the non-habitable portion, and other design limitations may be imposed by the zoning administrator to ensure public health and safety.

H. Conversions. The following provisions apply to accessory dwelling units created by the conversion of an existing and legal detached accessory building constructed with a final inspection prior to January 1, 2017, or from existing floor area within a primary residence.

1. Detached accessory building conversion. A setback non-conforming detached garage or other accessory building, constructed with a final inspection prior to January 1, 2017, may be rebuilt or converted into an accessory dwelling unit and no additional setback shall be required. An expansion of no more than 150 square feet beyond the same physical dimension of a setback non-conforming accessory building shall be permitted, so long as the expansion does not result in a greater setback encroachment. All applicable building code and other Ordinance Code provisions shall apply.

2. Within Existing Single-Family Residence. An accessory dwelling unit may be created within the existing space of a single-family residence, including the conversion of an attached garage. The accessory dwelling unit shall have independent exterior access from the existing structure, and the side and rear setbacks shall be sufficient for fire safety. Floor area limitations for the accessory dwelling unit shall be as stated in subsections 4.10.015(C) and (F) for attached accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units, respectively.

A setback non-conforming single-family residence may be expanded by up to 150 square feet to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit, so long as the expansion does not result in a greater setback encroachment.

I. Parking.

1. Number of Spaces. One off-street parking space is required for a standard accessory dwelling unit. No parking space is required for a junior accessory dwelling unit. For applicable parking exemptions, see subsection 4.10.015(I)(3).

3. Retention of Parking Spaces. Where an existing garage or carport is converted to an accessory dwelling unit that previously provided the required covered off-street parking for the primary residence, a replacement parking space shall not be required.

3. Special Parking Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other law or local regulation, no additional parking requirements shall apply to an accessory dwelling unit that meets one of the following requirements:

a. Is within one-half mile of public transit service and a designated point of access, such as a bus stop, light rail station, or any similar facility.

b. Is within a -h, Historic Preservation Combining Zoning District.

c. Is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

d. On-street parking permits are required but are not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.

e. There is a car share vehicle located within one-block of the accessory dwelling unit, which is further defined herein as a designated parking or pickup/delivery location or facility operated by a car share service.

The applicant shall be required to provide evidence to support any of the above exemptions.

J. Accessory Dwelling Units Subject to Other Discretionary Approvals. Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning ordinance, all new accessory dwelling units, including those attached to or included in an existing structure, that are located in certain combining districts shall comply with the following standards in lieu of the requirements and review procedures normally required in those combining districts:

1. New accessory dwelling units located in a -d, -d1, -d2, or -sr combining district shall be permitted by right, subject to compliance with a light reflectivity value (LRV) requirement of 45 or less that shall apply to the façade and roof. No other requirements shall apply. For accessory dwelling units created by converting existing floor area within an existing dwelling, this provision shall not apply unless an addition to the building footprint is proposed.

2. New accessory dwelling units located in the -h1 combining district shall be permitted by right, subject to compliance with the standards of Section 4.10.015(H)(1), except for properties listed as Priority List 1 or 2 properties identified in Section 3.50.090, which shall be subject to the requirements in Section 3.50.090(D), which include design review and recommendation by the Historic Heritage Commission to ensure the integrity of the historic resource is preserved. For accessory dwelling units created by converting existing floor area within an existing dwelling, this provision shall not apply unless there are proposed changes to exterior of the building.

3. A cumulative total of 800 square feet for all accessory dwelling units on a lot in the -n1 or -n2 combining district shall not be included in floor area calculations, pursuant to Sections 3.40.030 and 3.40.040.

(Ord. No. NS-1200.371, § 11, 3-10-20; Ord. No. NS-1200.383, § 7, 1-24-23)
